THE WORKS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY    Vol. III, part 3 of 3   ASCII VERSION

File 3 of 3.

This work was originally published in two parallel columns.  Where such
columns are found in the original, they have been rendered as a single text
with "A" or "B" added to the page number at the end of each column: A = end
page left column.  B = end page right column.  On many pages a prefatory
paragraph or a concluding group of sentences is full across the page.  These
instances are noted in curly brackets.

Pages in the original are marked thus at the bottom:  {page number} or {page
number A} and {page number B}.
Comments and descriptions are also set off by curly brackets {}
Comments and notes not in the original are identified with the initials of the
source: e.g.  WEH note = Bill Heidrick note, etc.  Descriptions of
illustrations are not so identified, but are simply in curly brackets.

   Text Footnotes have been expanded at or near the point of citation within double angle brackets, e.g. <<footnote>>.  For poems, most longer footnotes are cited in the text to expanded form below the stanzas.


************************************************************************


                          LIBER SECUNDUS VEL AMORIS

                                      TO

                                 MARY BEATON

                                WHOM I LAMENT

    "The Kabbalists say that when a man falls in love with a female elemental -- undine, sylph, gnome, or salamandrine, as the case may be -- she becomes immortal with him, or otherwise he dies with her. . . . The love of the magus for such beings is insensate, and may destroy him." -- "Eliphaz Levi."

   "Orpheus for the love he bare to his wife, snatcht, as it were, from him by untimely Death, resolved to go down to hell with his harp, to try if he might obtain her of the infernal power." -- "The Wisdom of the Ancients."

    {Columns resume}

    ORPHEUS, FINDING EURYDICE DEAD, STUNG BY A SERPENT, LAMENTS OVER HER.

    COME back, come back, come back, Eurydice!
            Come back to me!
    Lie not so quiet, draw some faint sharp breath!
            It is not death:
    It cannot, must not be, Eurydice.
            Come back to me!
    Let me as yet lament not!  Let me stoop! --
            Those eyelids droop
    Not with mere death, but dreams, Eurydice!
            Come back to me!

    O you that were my lover and my wife!
            Come back to life!
    Come back, breathe softly from the breast of gold
            These arms enfold.
    Give me your lips and kiss me once!  O wife,
            Come back to life!
    Nay, let the wind but stir the silky hair,
            (God's lesser air,
    Not his full blossom of woman's breath!)  O wife,
            Come back to life!  {158A}

    Stir once, move once, rise once, Eurydice!
            Be good to me!
    Rise once. -- O sleep not!  Listen!  Is not all
            Nature my thrall?
    Once only: be not dead, Eurydice!
            Be good to me!
    I love you -- be not dead! -- rise up and say
            "I feigned, I lay
    Thus so you kissed me" -- O Eurydice,
            Be good to me!

    There is not one sweet sigh of all the old sighs --
            Open your eyes!
    Not one warm breath of the young breast: no sleep
            Could be so deep.
    The last pale lotus opens to the skies.
            Open your eyes!
    Lift the blue eyelids under the deep lashes
            Till one light flashes!
    Wake with one supreme sigh like the old sighs!
            Open your eyes!

    I cannot leave you so, Eurydice.
            Come back to me!
    Just in the triumph, in love's utmost hour,
            Life's queenliest flower -- {158B}
    All shattered, overblown.  Eurydice,
            Come back to me!
    I cannot have you dead, and live: let death
            Strangle my breath
    Now as I kiss you still -- Eurydice!
            Come back to me!

    Fling down the foolish lyre, the witless power!
    Cast the dead laurel in the dust!  The flower
      Of all the world is marred, the day's desire
    Distorted in the eclipse, the sun's dead hour.

    Let me fall down beside thee!  Let me take
    The kisses that thou canst not give, and slake
      Despair in purposeless caresses, dire
    Shames fang-wise fastened of the eternal snake.

    Is there no warmth where beauty is so bright?
    No soul still flickering the the lambent light
      Still shed from all the body's excellence?
    No lamp unchidden of the utter night?

    Cannot my life be molten into thee,
    Or thy death fall with rosier arms on me,
      Or soul with soul commingle without sense,
    As the sun's rays strike deep into the sea?

    O beauty of all beauty -- central flower
    Of all the blossoms in the summer's bower!
      Fades not all nature in thy fall? the sun
    Not darken in the miserable hour?

    I hate all Nature's mockery of life.
    The laugh is grown a grin; the gentle strife
      Of birds and waves and winds at play is grown
    A curse, a cruelty.  My wife! my wife!

    I am broken, I cannot sleep, I cannot die.
    Pain, pain for ever!  Nature is a lie,
      The gods a lie.  Myself? but I am found
    Sole serious in the hateful comedy.

    Blackness, all blackness!  How I hate the earth,
    The curse that brought my being into birth.
      I, loving more her loveliness, am bound
    And broken -- thrice more bitter for my mirth!  {159A}

    Song, was it song I trusted in?  Or thou,
    Apollo, was it thou didst bind my brow
      With laurel for a poison-wreath of hell
    To sear my brain and blast my being now?

    A band of most corroding poison wound
    Dissolving with its venom the profound
      Deep of my spirit with its terrible
    Sense without speech and horror without sound.

    A devil intertwining in my heart
    Its cold and hideous lust, a twiforked dart
      Even from the fatherly and healing hand --
    The double death without a counterpart

    In hell's own deepest pit, far, far below
    Phlegethon's flame and Styx's stifling flow,
      Far below Tartarus, below the land
    Thrust lowest in the devilish vertigo.

    If I could weep or slumber or forget!
    If love once left me, with his eyelids wet
      With tender memory of his own despair
    Or frozen to a statue of regret!

    If but the chilling agony, that turns
    To bitter fever-heat that stings and burns
      Would freeze me, or destroy me, or impair
    My sense, that it should feel not how it yearns!

    Or if this pain were only pain, and not
    A deadness deeper than all pain, a spot
      And central core of agony in me,
    One heart-worm, one plague-leprosy, one blot

    Of death, one anguish deeper than control? --
    Then were I fit to gain the Olympian goal
      And fling forth fiery wailings to the sea,
    And tune the sun's ray to my smitten soul!

    How should I sing who cannot even see?
    Grope through a mist of changless misery.
      An age-long pain -- no time in wretchedness! --
    As of an hammer annihilating me {159B}

    With swift hard rhythm, the remorseless clang;
    Or as a serpent loosening his fang
      To bite more deeply -- this inane distress
    More than despair or death's detested pang.

    I live -- that shames me!  I am not a man.
    Nothing can I to sharpen or to span
      My throat with iron fingers, or my sword
    In my heart's acid where the blood began

    Long since to leap, and now drops deadly slow,
    Clotted with salt and sulphur and strong woe.
      I shall not die: the first sight of the sward
    Stained with the spectral corpse had stung me so,

    Not stabbed me, since I saw her and survive.
    I shall not die -- Ah! shall I be alive?
      This hath no part in either: bale and bliss
    Forget me, careless if I rot or thrive.

    Heaven forgot me -- or she were not dead!
    And Hades -- or I should not raise my head
      Now, and look wildly where I used to kiss,
    Gaze on the form whence all but form has fled!

    I am alone in all the universe,
    Changed to the shape and image of a curse,
      Muffled in self-conflusing, and my brain
    Wakes not nor sleeps: its destiny is worse.

    It thinks not, knows not, acts not, nor appeals,
    But hangs, remembers: it abides and feels
      As if God's vulture clung to it amain,
    And furies fixed with fiery darts and wheels

    Their horror, thought-exceeding, manifold,
    Vertiginous within me -- and the cold
      Of Styx splashed on me, making me immortal,
    Invulnerable in its bitter mould;

    Leaving its own ice, penetrating streams,
    Grim streaks, and dismal drops, abysmal beams
      Thrown from the gulph through the place and portal,
    Each drop o'erladen with a curse that steams  {160A}

    Unnatural in the coldness: let me be
    Alone, inviolate of eternity!
      Let all the winds of air leave me, nor fan:
    Nor wash me all the waves of all the sea!

    Let all the sun's light and the moon's be blind,
    And all the stars be lampless to my mind,
      Until I see the destiny of man
    And span the cruelty that lurks behind

    Its beauty, and its glory, and its splendour! --
    The girl-babe's face looks up to the mother tender,
      Looks for a kiss in dumb desire, and finds
    Her Jaws closed trap-like to expunge and end her!

    Let all the life and dream and death be done,
    And all the love and hate be woven in one,
      All things be broken of the winter winds,
    No soul stand up and look upon the sun!

    Save only mine! -- that my voice may confound
    The universe, and spell the mighty sound
      To shake all heaven and earth, to mingle hell
    In chaos, in some limitless profound;

    That it may tear Olympus from its place,
    Mix it with Hades, change the Ocean space,
      Level the tides of time that sink and swell,
    And curse my very father to his face!

    O father, father Apollo, did I wrong
    Thy chariot and thy horses in my song?
      Why clove thine arrow the unseated air,
    The heaven void of thee, why the thunderthong

    Slipped from the tether, and the fatal stone
    Sped not to my heart, not to mine alone?
      Ah why not? but to hers as she lay sleeping
    By hate, not fate, quelled, fallen, and overthrown?  {160B}

    She lies so pitiful and pure -- and I,
    Breast to her breast, mouth to her mouth, I lie,
      Hand upon hand, and foot on foot, sore weeping --
    Can she not live again or I not die?

    As the old prophet on the child I fall<<1>>
    And breathe -- but no breath answers me at all.
      All of my kisses stir no blush, no sigh;
    She will not hear me ever if I call!

<<1. Referring to the story of Elisha.>>


    Let the far music of oblivious years
      Sound in the sea beneath!
    Are not its waters one with all my tears?
    Hath Atropos no comfort in her shears?
      No Muse for me one wreath?

    Were I now dead and free to travel far
      Whither I will, ah me!
    Not whither I must -- were there no avatar
    Drawn like my love from some close kindred star?
      No shape seen on the sea?

    Were I now free of this intense desire,
      By swift magician power
    I might fly westward shod with wings of fire
    And find my love, and in her arms expire,
      Or wed her for an hour.

    (Not for an hour as man, but even as God
      Whose day is like an aeon.
    Love hath nor station, stage, nor period:
    But is at once in his inane abode
      Beneath the spring Dircean.)

    Alas, the will flies ere the power began.
      Lo, in the Idan grove
    Invoking Zeus to swell the power of Pan,
    The prayer discomfits the demented man!
      Lust lies as still as love.<<1>>

<<1. This obscure stanza means: that the invocation of high and pure forces cannot be diverted to low and impure ends; because the man becomes identified with what he invokes, of necessity.>>   {161A}

    Therefore in memory only is there life,
      And in sweet shapes of art:
    The same thought for the ointment and the knife --
    Oh lightning! blast the image of my wife
      Out of my mind and heart!


    How can one hour dissolve a year's delight?
    One arrow striking the full eagle-flight
      Drop him so swift, giving no time to die,
    No dusk to hearld and delay the night?

    A serpent stung her sleeoping: if the abyss
    Know any cell more dolorous than this,
      Were there a sharper tooth to destiny
    Than this that strikes me in the dead girl's kiss: --

    Oh if aught bitterer could be, could know,
    If ninefold Styx could gather in its flow
      Cocytus, Phlegethon, and Acheron,
    All mixed to one full flood of hate and woe:

    And poisoned by all venom like to his
    Who kissed Eurydice the traitor-kiss: --
      Then let them sting me four fold, nor atone
    Then for the eightfold misery of this!

    Is not some justice somewhere?  Where is he
    Hateful to God and man, a misery
      To his own vileness by exceeding it,
    Who crawls God-cursed throughout eternity

    Nay! sure he lives, and licks his slavered lips,
    Laughing to think how the sweet morsel slips,
      The breast-flower of my bride; the dainty bit
    Fit for -- ah God! the pearl-smooth blossom drips

    Poisonous blood that will not poison me,
    Though I drink deep its fierce intensity.
      My lips closed silent on her bosom's light,
    The stung blood springs -- like pearls beneath the sea  {161B}

    Whose moony glimmer hath a purple vein
    Hidden -- so I athirst of the said stain
      Drink up her body's life, as if to spite
    Its quiet, as if the venom were to drain

    Into my life -- that hurts me not at all,
    Struck by a stronger buffet: let me call
      All deaths! they come not, seeing I am broken
    In this one horror where a man may fall.

    I am alive, and live not: I am dead,
    And die not: on my desolated head
      No dew may drop, no word of God be spoken,
    None heard, if by some chance some word be said.

    The wheels of Fate are over me; quite crushed
    Lies my pale body where her body blushed,
      Quite dead! there is no single sob that stirs,
    No pulse of blood of all that filled and flushed

    Her cheek and mine, her breast and mine: and lo!
    How sunset's bloom is faded on the snow!
      There is no laugh of all those laughs of hers,
    Those tender thrills of laughter I used to know.

    Nor in all nature weep the careless eyes,
    Nor any soul of life may sympathise,
      All I once was in this is torn and rended --
    Scorned and forsaken the lone lyre lies.

    Hath that not yet some sympathy with me?
    That lyre that was myself, my heart's decree
      And ruler, subtle at the dawn, and splendid
    Noonwards, and soft at day's declivity!

    I flung it in my anguish to the ground.
    I raise it, and its music hath not found
      One string or snapped or loosened, and the tune
    Is the old triumph garlanded and crowned!  {162A}

    Folly and hate!  Blithe mockery of sorrow!
    Shrill me no harsh lies of some sweet tomorrow!<<1>>
      Soothe me no hateful mysteries of the moon,
    How one life lends what other lives may borrow!

<<1. Follow references to various ancient theories of immortality, reincarnation, and so on.>>

    I hate that foolish counterfoil of grief
    That one pain to its friend may give relief --
      Eurydice replace Eurydice
    Long hence -- no separation sharp and brief

    But dwelling in the intermediate
    Halls between Hades and the house of Fate:
      Atropos cut, and pass to Clotho, and she
    Respin the shuttle in some other state.

    What shall it boot me now to gather flowers
    From this young hope to wile the angry hours?
      That many thousand years shall pass, and show
    Eurydice again amid her bowers.

    Forgetting, and myself again be born,
    Clasp her grave beauty in the middle corn,
      Forgetting also: Time as fallen snow
    Blotting the mind and memory that adorn

    At least our present littleness: nor hope
    Of larger excellence, extended scope,
      Shall help me here, forgetting: nothing skills
    Of this poor truth -- to flatter with the trope!

    Wooing in mockery! -- nothing skills but this
    To raise her now, and resuspire the kiss
      United by the splendour of the will's
    Success -- to marry, to be made of bliss,

    I care not whether there or there: to live
    In memory and identity: to give
      No part of self or soul to Lethe's water:
    To grapple Nature, interpose an "if"  {162B}

    In her machinery of conditioned mood;
    Suspending law, suspending amplitude
      Of all Her function; to espouse her daughter
    In forced embrace lasciviously rude,

    Indecorous, shameful to the eternal "must"!
    Law may be mercy, mercy never just!
      Thus I would alter, and divide her ways,
    And let her wheels grind themselves down to dust.

    One supernatural event -- but one! --
    Should scale Olympus, shattering the throne
      Of the AEgis-bearing Father: and the days
    Of all the Universe be fallen and done.

    Well then?  O sceptred Splendour! dost Thou see
    How little means Thy Universe to Me?
      How petty looks Thy will to My desire?
    Hebe and Hera to Eurydice?

    I, knowing all the progress of the earth,
    The dim procession, altering death and birth,
      The Seven Stairs, the gusts of life in fire
    And Love in Life, and all the serpent girth

    Of sevenfold twining worlds and sevenfold ways
    And nights made sevenfold of the sevenfold days
      All the vast scheme evolving into man,
    And upward, onward, through Olympian haze

    Into the crowning spiritual mist,
    Where spirit in the spirit may subsist,
      Evolve itself in the amazing plan
    Through many planes, as shining amethyst

    Melts to the sapphire's sombre indigo,
    And lifts, still sapphire, to the ocean glow;
      Thence into emerald and the golden light,
    Till ruby crown the river's living flow

    And glory of colour in the sun's own flame --
    Beyond, to colours without sense or name,
      Impossible to man, whose vivid sight
    Would blast him with their splendour as they came {163A}

    Flashing through spiritual space, withdrawn
    Now, and now flung triumphant in the dawn
      Not of mere sun's rise, but before the birth
    Of a new system on the unfolded lawn

    Of space beyond the sceptre of the Gods!
    I, seeing all this would foil Time's periods
      For one small woman on this one mean earth,
    Would spoil the plan of the inane Abodes,

    Throw out of gear all Nature's enginery
    For such a grain of tinsel dust as I,
      Reluctant to be mangled in the wheel --
    Looks other meanness so contemptibly?

    Yet I persist.  Thou knowest, O most High Zeus,
    When Hera to thine Io did refuse
      Peace, and the gadfly bit like barbed steel
    Those limbs with dews of love once lying loose,

    When thy vast body boarded her, wrapped round
    Her senses with a mist of being profound,
      A flame-like penetration, serpentine,
    Twining and leaping without end or bound,

    Inevitable as the gasp of Fate: --
    Thou, reft of her by envy of thy mate
      Didst shake the heaven with bellowings undivine,
    And rooted stars from their primeval state.

    Not without law, sayest thou?  Almighty Zeus,
    Am I not also mothered of a muse?
      Let there be law! untimely to release
    This soul untinctured of the Stygian dews,

    Unsprinkled of Lethean lotus-drops!
    Life grows so steadily, so sudden stops --
      (Surely no part in Nature's moving peace!)
    Thus, when the young, like tempest-stricken crops

    Unripe, are blasted in the blossoming spring --
    This is a miracle, not the other thing!
      Nature insults herself, blasphemes her God,
    Thus cutting short the life's hard happening.  {163B}

    Nor would I suffer thus, nor she repine
    Had my wife faded (as rose-tinted wine
      Bleached in the sunlight) reached her period
    And fallen gently in the arms divine,

    Caressing arms of pale Persephone,
    And bathed her in death's river tenderly,
      Washing the whole bright body, the long limbs,
    The clothing hair, the face, the witchery

    Of all the smiling shape in the dark stream,
    As one who gathers the first floral beam
      Of daylight by the water, dives and swims
    Deep in cool alleys, softer than a dream:

    So, rising to the other bank, aglow
    With the bright motion and the stream's young flow,
      She might discover the Elysian ground,
    And find me waiting, find me sad and slow

    Pacing the green flower-lighted turf, and leap
    Into my body's kisses, into sleep: --
      Sweeter this latter bridal than we found
    The first, now lost in time's eternal deep.

    It is not cruel if the ripe fruit fall --
    But never an elegy funereal
      Wept for untimely burial, but cried
    Aloud against the Fates, forebore to call

    In pity or passion on the Gods of peace;
    But cursed, but wailed, nor bade its sharp tongue cease
      Until lightning spat, sharp to divide
    Bone from its marrow for their blasphemies!

    So I should curse, unless indeed my grief
    Be not to great to yield me such relief.
      Methinks a sob must start and mar the roar
    Of loud harsh laughing bitter unbelief

    Scarring the sky with poisonous foam of song.
    Also, what curse might remedy the wrong?
      Are not all feuds forgotten in a war?
    All stars exhausted in Astraea's throng  {164A}

    When the swift sun leaps skyward?  Let me speak
    Words rather of wisdom: hate may rage and wreak
      Vengeance in vain if wisdom smile beyond,
    Too high to care, too ultimate to seek.

    The bitterest sorrow of all sorrow is this:
    I had no time to catch one last long kiss,
      Nor bid farewell, nor lay one lily-frond
    Of resurrection for the sign of bliss,

    Remembrance of some immortality
    Affirmed if not believed: alas for me
      That might not interchange the last sad vows,
    Nor close the blue eyes clearer than the sea

    Before they darkened, and the veil of death
    Shrouded their splendour: still there lingereth
      Some sad white lustre on the icy brows,
    Some breast-curve surely indicating breath,

    Some misty glamour of deep love within
    The eye's cold gleam! some dimple on the chin
      Hinting of laughter: even now she seems
    A folded rosebud, where the ivory skin

    Closes the ripe warm centre flower, the mind,
    The spirit that was beautifully kind,
      The sense of beauty shadowed in deep dreams,
    Sent though the horn gates by some sleepy wind.

    All lingers: all is gone: a little while,
    And all the live sweet rapture of the smile
      Of her whole being is discomfited,
    The body broken, desolated, vile,

    Till nought remains but the memorial urn
    Of deep red gold, less golden than did burn
      Once the strong breast: the ash within is shed,
    Dust given for flowers: what memory shall turn {164A}

    Unto the flowers, think worthy to remember
    How the dust scattered from their fading ember
      Is their own sign and seal of fatherhood,
    Grey seas of sorrow sun-kissed into amber.

    Above me hangs the sun: horrid he hangs,
    A rayless globe of hell, shooting forth fangs
      Snake-wise to parch and burn my solitude,
    Nor leave me quiet lamenting, with these pangs

    Tearing my live, more Promethean
    Than ever Titan knew -- the sunbright span
      Of narrow water mocks me, brightening
    Far to the indigo Ionian.

    The sun hangs high, as in the Arabian tale
    Enchanted palaces defy the gale,
      Perched upon airy mountains, on the wing
    Of genii poised, souls suffering and pale

    With their long labour: wizard spire and dome
    That maidens grown magicians had for home,
      Where the charmed sword and graven talisman
    Held them supremely floating on the foam

    Where cloudier seas innavigably roll,
    Misty with elemental shape or soul,
      This grey essential nebulae of man,
    Caught in the mesh of magical control!

    All these are beautiful and shapen so
    That every bastion flames a separate glow
      Of changing colour: all detestable,
    Abhorrent, since the goodly-seeming show

    Is one large lie of cruelty and lust,
    Carven from the spectral images of dust,
      Founded on visions of the accursed well,
    And built of shame and hatred and distrust,

    And all things hateful and all lying things --
    O song! where wanderest on forgetful wings?
      Shall these wild numbers help thee to thine own,
    Or change the winter's gramarye to spring's?  {165A}

    Rather beguile the tedious mourning hours
    With memory of the long-forgotten bowers,
      Where loves resurged from cave and grove to throne,
    From nuptial banquet to the bed of flowers!

    Rather forget the near catastrophe,
    And turn my music toward Eurydice;
      Awake in day-dream all the ancient days,
    When love first blossomed on the springing tree!

    Let me recall the days beyond regret,
    And tune my lyre to love, sharpen and set
      The strings again to the forgotten ways,
    That I may tread them over, and forget!


    In child-like meditative mood
      I wandered in the dell,
    Passed through the quiet glades of the wood,
      And sought the haunted well,
    Half hopeful that its solitude
      Might work some miracle.

    The oaks raised angry hands on high:
      The willows drooped for tears:
    The yews held solemn ceremony,
      Magical spells of years.
    I saw one cypress melancholy,
      A prince among his peers.

    So, turning from the arboreal seat
      And midmost hollow of earth,
    I followed Hamadryads' feet
      That made at eve their mirth
    To where the streamlet wandered fleet
      To show what time was worth.

    I watched the waters wake and laugh
      Running o'er pebbly beaches,
    Writing amazement's epitaph
      With freshets, turns, and reaches: --
    The only tale too short by half
      That nature ever teaches.  {165B}

    Then growing grander as it swept
      Past bulrushes and ferns,
    Gathering the tears that heaven had wept,
      The water glows and burns
    In sunlight, where no shadows crept
      Around the lazy turns.

    All on a sudden silence came
      Athwart some avenue
    Where through the trees arrowed the flame
      From the exultant blue;
    And all the water-way became
      One heart of glittering dew.

    The waters narrowed for a space
       Between twin rocks confined,
    Carven like Gods for poise and grace,
      Like miracles for mind:
    Each fashioned like a kissing face,
      The eyes for joy being blind.

    The waters widened in a pool,
      Broad mirror of blue light.
    The surface was as still and cool
      As the broad-breasted night.
    Engraven of no mortal tool,
      The granite glistened white.

    As if to shield from mortal gaze
      A nymph's immortal limbs,
    The shadow of the buttress stays
      And dips its head and swims,
    While moss engirdles it with grays
      And greens that dew bedims.

    Now, at the last, the western end,
      Most miracle of all!
    The groves of rock dispart and rend
      Their sacred cincture-wall;
    All tunes of heaven their rapture lend
      To make the waterfall.

    There, streaming from the haze and mist
      Where dew is dashed in spray,
    Rises a halo sunrise-kissed
      And kissed at close of day
    From ruby unto amethyst,
      Within the veil of grey.  {166A}

    And there within the circled light
      I saw a dancing thing,
    Most like the tender-leaved night
      Of moonrise seen in spring,
    A shadow luminous and white
      Like a ghost beckoning.

    And then dim visions came to me,
      Faint memories of fear:
    As when the Argo put on sea
      Such stories we did hear,
    Stories to tremble at and flee --
      And others worth a tear.

    I thought of how a maiden man
      Might hear a deadly song
    And clasp a siren in his span,
      And feel her kiss grow strong
    To drag him with caresses wan
      Into the House of Wrong.<<1>>

<<1. See Homer's Odyssey.>>

    Another:<<1>> how the women grew
      Like vines of tender grape,
    And how they laughed as lovers do,
      And took a lover's shape,
    And how men sought them, free to woo --
      To leave them, no escape!

<<1. See Lucian.>>

    Another:<<1>> how a golden cup
      A golden girl would pour,
    And whoso laughed and drank it up
      Grew wise and warrior:
    But whoso stayed to smile and sup
      Returned -- ah, never more!

<<1. Is this a perversion of the story of Calypso?>>

    And yet again<<1>> -- a river steep,
      A maiden combing light,
    Her hair's enchantment -- she would weep
      And sing for love's delight,
    Until the listener dropped to sleep
      In magic of her night.  {166B}

<<1. See Goethe's "Lorelei.">>

    And then the maiden smoothed her tresses,
      And led him to the river,
    Caught him and kissed with young caresses,
      And then -- her cruel smiles quiver!
    Beneath the waves his life represses
      For ever and for ever!

    I knew the danger of the deed
      The while enrapt I gladdened.
    My eyes upon the dancer feed
      As one by daylight saddened
    After long night whose slumbers bleed,
      By dreams deceived and maddened!

    It might be -- the delusive dance,
      The shadowy form I saw,
    Apollo's misty quivering lance
      Thrown to elude God's law;
    It might be -- doth the maid advance,
      Evanish, or withdraw?

    So stung by certainty's mistrust,
      Or tranced in dream of sin,
    Or blinded by some Panic dust,
      By Dionysian din
    Deafened, arose the laughing lust
      To fling my body in!

    I stood upon the rock, and cried,
      And held my body high
    (Not caring if I lived or died)
      Erect against the sky:
    Then plunged into the wheeling tide,
      And vanished utterly.

    "O shape half-seen of love, and {l}ost
      Beneath time's sightless tide,
    What obolus of the vital cost
      Remains, or may abide?
    Or what perception memory steal,
    Once passed upon the whirling wheel?

    "O hope half held of love, and fled
      Beyond the ivory gate,
    A dream gone from the hapless head
      By fury of a fate!
    What image of the hope returns
    But stings with agony that which yearns?  {167A}

    "O face half kissed in faith and fear,
      Eager and beautiful!
    Drop for mortality one tear!
      For life one smile recall!
    There is no passion made for me --
    Else were my water-well the sea."

    Such tune my falling body snapped
      Within the sacred sides,
    While the warm waves with laughter lapped,
      And changed their tuned tides,
    And all my being was enwrapped,
      A bridegroom's in the bride's.

    Deep in the hollow of the place
      A starry bed I saw,
    Gemmed with strange stones in many a space
      Of godlike rune and law.
    Such fancies as the fiery face
      Of living Art might draw.

    But rising up I lift my head
      Beyond the ripples clean:
    My arms with spray dew-diamonded
      Stretched love-wise to my queen
    That danced upon the light, and shed
      Her own sweet light between.

    But never a mortal joy might know,
      Hold never a mortal lover!
    Whose limbs like moonshine glint and glow,
      Throb, palpitate, and hover: --
    Pale sunrise woven with the snow
      Athwart a larchen cover!

    So danced she in the rainbow mist,
      A fairy frail and chaste,
    By moon caressed, by sunlight kissed
      A guerdon vain and waste;
    And the misery of her thankless tryst
      Stole on me as she paced.

    For never her lips should be caressed
      By love's exulting stings,
    Whose starry shape shone in the west,
      Held of the glimmering wings.
    Her shadowy soul perceived the jest
      Of man and mortal things.  {167B}

    And there I vowed a solemn oath
      To Aphrodite fair,
    Sealing that sacramental troth
      With a long curl of hair,
    And the strange prayer's reiterant growth
      Sent shining through the air.


               ("Invoking Aphrodite")

          Daughter of Glory, child
          Of Earth's Dione mild
    By the Father of all, the AEgis-bearing King!
          Spouse, daughter, mother of God,
          Queen of the blest abode
    In Cyprus' splendour singly glittering.
          Sweet sister unto me,
          I cry aloud to thee!
    I laugh upon thee laughing, O dew caught up from sea!

          Drawn by sharp sparrow and dove
          And swan's wide plumes of love,
    And all the swallow's swifter vehemence,
          And, subtler than the Sphinx,
          The ineffable iynx<<1>>
    Heralds thy splendour swooning into sense,
          When from the bluest bowers
          And greenest-hearted hours
    Of Heaven thou smilest toward earth, a miracle of flowers!

<<1. An imaginary animal, sacred to Venus.>>

          Down to the loveless sea
          Where lay Persephone
    Violate, where the shad of earth is black,
          Crystalline out of space
          Flames the immortal face!
    The glory of the comet-tailed track
          Blinds all black earth with tears.
          Silence awakes and hears
    The music of thy moving come over the starry spheres.

          Wrapped in rose, green and gold,
          Blues many and manifold,
    A cloud of incense hides thy splendour of light;  {168A}
          Hides from the prayer's distress
          Thy loftier loveliness
    Till thy veil's glory shrouds the earth from night;
          And silence speaks indeed,
          Seeing the subtler speed
    Of its own thought than speech of the Pandean reed!

          There no voice may be heard!
          No place for any word!
    The heart's whole fervour silently speeds to thee,
          Immaculate! and craves
          Thy kisses or the grave's,
    Till, knowing its unworthiness to woo thee,
          Remembers, grows content
          With the old element,
    And asks the lowlier grace its earlier music meant.

          So, Lady of all power!
          Kindle this firstling flower
    The rainbow nymph above the waterfall
          Into a mortal shade
          Of thee, immortal maid,
    That in her love I gather and recall
          Some memory mighty and mute
          In love's poor substitute
    Of thee, thy Love too high, the impossible pursuit!


          Then from the cloud a golden voice
            Great harmonies persuade,
          That all the cosmic lawns rejoice
            Like laughter of a maid;
          Till evolution had no choice
            But heard it, and obeyed.

            "Show by thy magic art
              The hero-story!
            Awake the maiden heart
              With tunes of glory!
            With mortal joys and tears,
              Keen woes and blisses,
            Awake her faiths and fears,
              Her tears and kisses!"  {168B}


          I caught the lavish lyre, and sate
            Hard by the waterfall,
          Twisting its sweetness intimate
            Into the solemn call
          Of many dead men that were great,
            The plectron's wizard thrall.

          Thus as she danced, nor ceased, nor cared,
            I set the sacred throng
          Of heroes into acts that fared
            In Argo light and long,
          The foes they fought, the feats they dared,
            In shadow-show and song.


              ("The play of Argonautae is shadowed before them by Orpheus'
                  magical might.")

    So faded all the dream: so stole
    Some fearful fondness in her soul;
    Even as a cloud thrilled sharply through
    With lightning's temper keen and true,
    Splitting the ether: so again
    Grew on me the ecstatic pain,
    Seeing her tremble in mid-air.
    No flower so exquisitely fair
    Shakes out its petals at the dawn;
    No breath so beautiful is drawn
    At even by the listening vale.
    For oh! she trembled!  Frail and pale,
    Her looks surpassing loveliness
    Lulled its own light to fond distress,
    As if the soul were hardly yet
    Fit to remember or forget
    New-born! and though the goddess bade
    The nymph-bud blossom to a maid,
    And soulless immortality
    Reach to a soul, at last to die,
    For love's own sake, bliss dearly bought
    For change's altering coin ill-wrought,
    It seemed as through the soul were strange,
    Not fledged, not capable to range
    At random through the world of sense
    Opened so swift and so intense
    Unto the being.  Thus she stood
    Impatient on the patient flood
    With wonder waking in her eyes.
    Thus the young dove droops wing, and dies,  {169A}
    In wonder why the winged thing
    Loosed from yon twanging silver string
    Should strike, should hurt.  But now she wakes,
    Wreathes like a waterfall of snakes
    The golden fervour of her hair
    About the body brave and bare
    Starred in the sunlight by the spray,
    And laughed upon me as I lay
    Watching the change: First dawn of fire!
    First ghost of nightfall's grey desire!
    First light of moonrise!  Then, as June
    Leaps out of May, her lips took tune
    To song most soft, a spiral spell,
    As siren breathing in a shell.
    The notes were clustered round the well
    Like angels clustering round a god.
    Let memory wake from its abode
    Of dim precision lost for long
    The grace and grandeur of the song!


    Who art thou, love, by what sweet name I quicken?
    By whom, O love, my soul is subtly stricken?
        O Love, O Love, I linger
    On the dear word and know not any meaning,
    Nor why I chant; there is a whisper weaning
    My soul from depths I knew to depths I guess,
    Centred in two words only: "Love" and "Yes."
        What lyrist's gentle finger
    Strikes out a note, a key, a chord unheard of?
    What voice intones a song I know no word of?
        Who am I, Love, and where?
    What is the wonder of this troublous singing?
    What is the meaning of my spirit's clinging
    Still to the two sweet words: repeat, repeat!
    "Yes, Love!" and "Yes, Love!"  Oh the murmur sweet!
        The fragrance in the air!
    I know not, I; amid the choral gladness
    Steals an essential tremor as of sadness,
        A grace-note to the bosom  {169B}
    Of music's spell that binds me, as in Panic
    Dance to some grasp unthinkable, Titanic,
    Unto the words fresh flowers that distil
    Uttermost fragrance in the mind and will,
        The unsuspected blossom!
    What is the change -- new birth of spring-time kisses
    Alone in all these water-wildernesses?
        What change? what loveliness!
    Comes this to all?  I heard my sisters crying
    No tale like this -- O! were I only lying
    Asleep amid the ferns, my soul would weep
    Over and over in its endless sleep;
        "Yes, love!" and "yes!" and "yes!"


    So by some spell divinely drawn
    She came to me across the dawn,
    With open arms to me; and sobbed
    "Yes, love!" and "Yes, love!"  O how throbbed
    The giant glory at my heart!
    And I?  I drew away, apart,
    Lest by mere chance to me she came.
    But curling as a wind-blown flame
    She turned, she found me.  As the dew
    Melts in the lake's dissolving blue
    So to my arms she came.  And now,
    Now, now I hold her!
                          Broke the brow
    Of all wide heaven in thunder!  Hear
    Tremendous vortices of fear
    Swirl in the ether.  What new terror
    Darkens the blue pool's sliver mirror?
    How bursts the mountain-chasm asunder?
    Whose voice reverberates in thunder
    Muttering what curse?  The sun dissolves
    In anguish; the mad moon revolves
    Like a wild thing about its cage;
    The stars are shaken in the rage
    Of -- who but Zeus?  Before our gaze,
    (My love's in shuddering amaze,
    Of birth deceived and death forlorn,
    And mine in anger, ay! and scorn!)
    He stood -- the mighty One!  So earth
    And heaven proclaimed that fearful birth:
    So they grew silent lest he curse.
    Dead silence hushed the universe;  {170A}
    And then in clear calm tones he spoke:
    "Fools! who have meddled, and awoke
    The inmost forces of the world!
    One lightning from my hand had hurled
    Both to annihilation's brink.
    What foolish goddess bade ye think
    Ye thus could play with thunder, roll
    Your wheels upon the world, control
    The stately being of a soul?
    Just am I ever!  Therefore know
    The unrevengeful law of woe
    That ye invoke.  Thou seekest life,
    Child of my water!  Thou a wife,
    Child of my sun!  Draw living breath,
    Maiden, and gain the guerdon -- death!
    Thou take the wife, and risk the fate
    AEons could hardly culminate
    To lose thy soul!  Not two but one
    Are ye.  Together, as the stone,
    The oak, the river, or the sea,
    Mere elements of mine be ye,
    Or both resolve the dreadful life,
    And take death's prize!  Take thou the wife,
    Thou, who didst know.  Her ignorance
    Resolve itself upon a chance!
    She shall decide the double fate.
    Be still, my child, and meditate!
    This is an hour in heaven."  He ceased
    And I was silent.  she released
    Her soul from that tremendous birth
    Of fear in gentle-minded mirth.
    "Great Sir!" she cried, "the choice is made!
    An hour ago I was afraid,
    Knew nothing, and loved not.  But I
    Know now not this you say -- to die.
    Some doubtful change!  An hour ago
    I was a nymph.  I did not know
    This change: but now for death or life
    I care not.  Am I not his wife?
    I love him.  Now I would not leave
    That joy once tasted; shall not grieve
    If even that should ever cease,
    So great a pleasure (and a peace!)
    I have therein. And by the sense
    Of love's intuitive influence
    I know he wills me to remain
    Woman."  "How frivolous and vain, {170B}
    O Zeus," I cried, "art thou to rise
    Out of Olympus' ecstasies!
    Omnipotent! but to control
    The first breath of a human soul! --"
    The thunder rolled through heaven again,
    Void was the spring-delighted plain
    Of that gigantic phantasy.
    I turned to my Eurydice
    Even as she turned.  The faint breath glows, --
    The lightning of a living rose.
    The bright eyes gleam -- night's spotless stars
    Glimmering through folded nenuphars.
    The red mouth moves, still to the word:
    "Yes, love!" and "yes, love!"  Then I heard
    No sound and saw no sight -- the world
    Folded its mighty wings, and curled
    Its passion round us; bade forget
    The joy with which our eyes were wet.
    All faded, folded in the bliss;
    Unfolded the first fadeless kiss.

    Then my soul woke, not sundering lips,
    But winged against the black eclipse
    Of sense: my soul on wings did poise
    Her glory in the vast turquoise
    Of the whole sky: expanded far
    Beyond the farthest sun or star,
    Beyond all space, all time.  I saw
    The very limits of the law
    That hath no bounds: beheld the bliss
    Of that first wonder of the kiss
    In its true self: how very love
    Is God, and hath its substance of
    Pure light: and how love hath its cause
    Beyond religions, worlds, and laws;
    Is in itself the first: and moves
    All evolution, and disproves
    God in affirming God: all this
    In that one rapture of the kiss
    I knew, and all creation's pain
    Fell into nothing in my brain,
    As I, remaining man, involved
    All life's true purpose, and dissolved
    The phantoms (of itself create)
    In a mysterious sweet state,
    Wherein some tune began to move
    Whose likeness and whose life was love.  {171A}

    Roll, strong life-current of these very veins,
      Into my lover's soul, my soul that is!
    Thrill, mighty life of nerves, exultant strains
    Triumphant of all music in a kiss!
        Fade! fade, oh strenuous sense
        Into the soul intense
    Of life beyond your weak imagining!
        And, O thou thought, dissever
        Thy airy life for ever
    While the bright sounds are lifted up to spring
        Beyond this tide of being,
        Shadows and sense far fleeing
      Into a shadow deeper than the Ocean
      When passes all the mind's commotion
    To a serener sky, a mighty calm emotion!

    The whole world fades, folds over its wide pinions
      Into a darkness deeper than its own.
    Silence hath shattered all the dream-dominions
      Of life and light: the grey bird's soul is flown
        Into a soundless night,
        Lampless: a vivid flight
    Beyond the thrones and stars of heaven down hurled,
        Till the great blackness heaves
        An iron breast, and cleaves
    The womb of night, another mightier world.
        Lost is my soul, and faded
        The light of life that braided
      Its comet tresses into golden fire.
      Fade, fade, the phantoms of desire!
    Speed, speed the song of love upon the living lyre!

    Lo!  I abide not, and my lover's glory
      Abides not: in the swaying of those tides
    Gathers beneath some mighty promontory
      One mightier wave, deep drowns it, and abides.
        Save that one wave alone
        Nought in the void is known,
    That wave of love, that sole exultant splendour
        Throned o'er all being, supreme,
        A single-shining beam
      Burning with love, unutterably tender.  {171B}
        Ah! the calm wave retires.
        Down all the fearful fires
      Go thundering to darkness, so dissever
      Their being from pure being, that the river
    Of love is waveless now, and is pure love for ever.

    Then mightier than all birth of stars or suns,
      Breaks the vast flood and trembles in its tide.
    Serene an splendid shine the mystic ones,
      Exult, appal, reiterate, abide.
        Timid and fleet the earth
        Comes rushing back to birth,
    Brighter and greener, radiant with gold
        Of a diviner sun,
        An exultation
    Of life to life, of light to light untold.
        I?  I remain, and see
        Across eternity
      My lover's face, and gaze, and know the worth
      Of love's life to the glowing earth,
    The kiss that wakes all life unto a better birth.

    So the swoon broke.  I saw the face
    (Shining with Love's reverberant grace)
    Of my own love across the lawn,
    As warm and tender as the dawn
    Tinting the snows of heaven-born hills,
    Enamelling the mountain rills
    With light's chameleon-coloured dyes;
    So shone the love-light in grey eyes,
    Changing for laughter and for tears,
    Changeless for joy of myriad years.
    This, this endures; there is no lover,
    No loved one; all the ages cover
    These things from sight: but this abides
    Floating above the whelming tides
    Of time and space: abides for ever
    Whether the lovers join or sever.
    There is no change: the love exists
    Beyond the moment's suns and mists
    in me, abiding: and I see
    No lover in Eurydice,
    Save that her kiss awoke in me {172A}
    This knowledge, this supreme content,
    Annihilation of the event,
    The vast eternal element
    Of utter being, bliss, and thought,
    In dissolution direly wrought
    Of sense, identity's eclipse,
    The shadow of a lover's lips.
    The awful steel of Death divides
    The alternation of the tides
    Of consciousness, and binds in bliss
    The dead man to the girl's live kiss.


    So sped my wooing: now I surely think
    Suspended here upon the burning brink
      Of this dim agony, invading sense,
    That bliss should still abide: but now I shrink,


    Fall from the crags of memory, and abide
    Now in this nature-life, basilisk-eyed,
      And serpent-stinging: yea, I perish thence.
    That perishes which was: and I am tied


    Unto myself: the "I" springs up again
    Bound to the wheel of speedless sense and pain,
      None loosing me.  Past is the utter bliss;
    Present the strong fact of the death, the stain


    Of the marred lives: I meditate awhile
    Not on the mere light of the girl, the smile
      Deepening down to the extremest kiss;
    Not of the long joys of the little isle


    Set in Ionian waters, where the years
    Passed, one long passion, too divine for tears,
      Too deep for laughter: but on that divine
    Sense beyond sense, the shadow of the spheres


    Lost in the all-pervading light of love:
    That bliss all passion and all praise above;
      Impersonal, that fervour of the shrine
    Changed to pure peace that had its substance of  {172B}


    Nothing but love: in vain my thoughts evoke
    That light amidst the deadly night and smoke
      Of this dread hour: there's nothing serves nor skills
    Here, since that hateful "I" of me awoke,


    Making me separate from the wings of life.
    Nothing avails me of the cruel strife
      With my own being: hideous sorrow fills
    My heart -- O misery! my wife! my wife!


    Stay! if I cannot be the Absolute,
    Let me be man! discard the wailing lute
      And wake the lyre: the mightier than me
    Drag up the courage in me to dispute


    The battle with despair: awake the strings
    Stronger than earth, than the immortal kings
      Alike of death and life: invoke the sea
    That I may cross her on the viewless wings


    Of song, find out the desolating river
    That girds the earth, unloose the silver quiver,
      Choosing an arrow of sharp song to run
    Down to the waters that lament for ever: --


    And cleave them!  That my song's insistent spell
    Rive the strong gates of iron-builded hell,
      And move the heart of the ill-hearted one.
    Yea! let me break the portals terrible, {173A top}


    And bring her back! come back, Eurydice!
    Come back, pale wanderer to Eternity!
      Come back, my wife, my wife, again to love!
    Come back, my wife! come back, come back to me!


    Enough! my purpose holds: no feeble cries!
    No sob shall shake these nerves: no ecstasies
      Of hope, or fear, or love avail to move
    Those iron-hearted dooms and destinies.


    I will be calm and firm as I were Zeus.
    I will descend to Hades and unloose
      My wife: prevail on pale Persephone,
    Laving her love-locks with exalted dews


    Of stern grey song; such roseate tunes espouse
    That all the echoes of that lonely house
      Answer me sob for sob, that she decree
    With love deep-seated in her lofty brows


    Forth sparkling: and with Hades intercede,
    So as I stir the judgment-seat, and plead,
      The awful brows may lighten, and decree
    My wife's return -- a poet's lofty meed!  {173B top full page below}


                           EXPLICIT LIBER SECUNDUS.






                          LIBER TERTIUS VEL LABORIS

                                      TO

                                THE MEMORY OF

                                  IEHI AOUR,

              WITH WHOM I WALKED THROUGH HELL, AND COMPELLED IT

   "Neither were his hopes frustrated: For having appease them with them melodious sound of his voice and touch, prevailed at length so far, as that they granted him leave to take her away with him; but on this condition, that she should follow him, and he not to look back upon her, till he came to the light of the upper World; which he (impatient of, out of love and care, and thinking that he was in a manner past all danger) nevertheless violated, insomuch that the Covenant is broken, and she forthwith tumbles back again headlong into Hell."  -- "The Wisdom of the Ancients."

   "Moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays." -- "Rape of Lucrece."

{columns resume}

            ORPHEUS TRAVELS TO HADES.

            AS I pass in my flight
              On the awed storm cloud,
                Steeps steeper than sleep,
            Depths deeper than night,
              I have furrowed and ploughed
                (Deep calling to deep!)
            Through the spaces of light,
              The heads of them bowed
                For the fears that weep,
            And the joys that smite,
              And the loves disallowed.
                They are risen; they leap;
            They wing them in white,
              Crying aloud
                Words widowed that keep
    The frost of their fires forgotten and faded from Memory's steep.


            As I pass in my glory
              O'er sea and land,
                I smite the loud tune
              From a fervid hand,
            By the promontory,
                The mountainous moon.  {174A}
            Vivid and hoary,
                Twin birds, as I hark
              Take fire, understand
                The ways of the dark
                  As an angel did guide me,
            Waving the brand
              Of the dawn's red spark.
              My measures mark
            The influence fine
            Of the voyage divine
              Of the airy bark
            Wherein I travel
            O'er mountain and level,
                The land, and the sea.
            And the beings of air,
              And the lives of the land,
            And the daughters of fire,
              And the sons of the Ocean,
                Come unto me;
            My chariot bear,
              My tunes understand,
            My love desire,
              Share my emotion.
            They gather, they gather,
            Apollo, O father!
              They gather around;
              They echo the sound {174B}
            Of the tune that rejoices,
              The manifold measure
            Of feet tuned to voices
              Of terrible pleasure,
            We pass in our courses
              Above the grey treasure
            Of seas in Earth's forces,
              Her girdle, her splendour.
            We bridle the horses
                Of sea as we lend her
              Tunes subtle and tender
            To sink in her sources.
                The air's love?  We rend her!
            We pass to the West,
            We sink on the breast
            Of the Ocean to rest.

            As I pass, as I madden
              In fury of flight,
            The sea's billows gladden
              Invoking the light.
            The depths of her sadden
              Not seeing the sight
            Of the glorious one,
            Whose steed is the Sun,
              Whose journey is certain,
            Who speeds to the gate,
              The visible curtain
            Of visible fate.
              My soul takes no hurt in
            Their gloom: I await
              The portals to rise
              In the desolate skies.
            I trust to my song
            Irresistibly strong
              To sunder and shatter
              Those towers of matter.
            They rise!  Oh!  They rise,
              The terrible towers
                Of Hades: they lift
            Across the white skies
                Those terrible-cliffed
              Rocks, where the hours
            Beat vainly: where lies
                The horrible rift
              Of the earth's green bowers
                Where the wan ships drift,
                And the sun's rays shift, {175A}
            And the river runs
              Whose banks have no flowers,
            Whose waves have no suns.
              Sheer to the terror
            Of heaven, the walls
              Strike; and the mirror
            Of water recalls
              No truth, but dim error.
            The soul of me falls
              Down to the glamour
            Of dream; and fear
              Beats like a hammer.
            Here! it is here!
              Lost are my friends;
            The elements shrink
              Where the life-world ends
            On the icy brink
              Of the sunless river;
              Ends, and for ever!

            I pass to the portals
              Of death in my flight.
                I sound at the gates.
            I call the immortals
              Of death and of night.
                I call on the Fates
            By the summons of light.
              The gates are rended;
            The rocks divide;
              My soul hath descended
            Abreast of the tide.
              I, single and splendid,
            Death have defied!
    I pass by the terrible gates and the guardians dragon-eyed.

            I thunder adown
              The vast abyss.
            (The journey's crown
              Is a woman's kiss!),
                What terrors to master!
                What fear and disaster
            To gain the renown
              And the fadeless bliss!
            I thunder aloud
              On the rocks as I fly,
            Borne on a cloud
              In the gloomy sky.  {175B}
            Shaped like a shroud,
              Draped like a pall,
              I shrink not; I fall
            To the blackness below
            With my soul aglow.
              No taint of a fear!
            For I know, I know
              Eurydice near,
              Eurydice here!
            The purpose divine
              Thrills my soul as wine.
    Now I pass to the soul of the dark, confronting the innermost shrine.


            Hail to ye, warders
            That guard the borders
              Of Hades!  All hail to ye, dwellers of night!
            But I am the soul
            In a man's control.
              Ye have nought to do with the dweller of light!

            Hail to ye, hail
            In the hollow vale,
              Your weapons are lifted against me in vain.
            My lure shall charm ye,
            My voice disarm ye,
              For I am the soul overshadowed of pain!

            Hail to ye, wardens
            Of Death's grey gardens!
              O flowerless and vineless your bowerless vale!
            But I must alone
            To the wonderful throne.
              Let fall the vain spears, shadows!  Hail to ye!  Hail!

            The phantoms diminish,
              The shadows fall back.
                Lost in the vision
            In fires that finish
              Stark and black
                With lust and derision;  {176A}
            And all the illusion
              Is fallen to the ground.
                The warders are beaten
            They go in confusion;
              Their place is not found.
                The air hath eaten
            With wide-gaping jaws
              A furious folk.
            Lost is the cause
              In Tartarean smoke.
            I, through the wall
              Of impassable gloom,
                Apart from the sun,
            Pass as a ghost,
              Bearing the lyre.
            The sad notes fall
              To the sorrowful womb;
                One after one
            They leap as a host
              With weapons of fire
            On a desolate coast,
            Where love is lost
    And the bitterness clings of fear, and the sadness gods of desire!


            Thrice girded with brass,
              Thrice bound with iron,
                The gate is in three
                  Pillars of gold.
            But I will pass
              (My heart as a lion,
                My lyre as a key!)
                  To the gates of old,
            To the place of despair
              And the walls of dread,
                The halls of the doomed,
              The homes of the dead,
            The houses where
            The beautiful air
                Is as air entombed.
            Nothing can shake
              Those terrible walls.
            No man can wake
              With silver calls
    The home of the lost and the lone, the gate of the Stygian thralls.
        {176B}
            But thou, O Titan!
              O splendour triform!
                Gloomiest dweller
                  Of uttermost night!
            My journey enlighten!
              O soul of the storm!
                Waker and queller
                  Of sombre delight,
            Hecate! hearken
              The soul of my prayer!
            Glitter and darken
              Through sulphurous air!
    Let the sacrifice move thee to joy, the invoker thy glory declare
            In words that shall please
            Thy terrible peace,
              O speedy to save,
    In flames of fine fire that bedew the deepest Tatarean cave!

                ["Invoking HECATE"]

    O triple form of darkness!  Sombre splendour!
      Thou moon unseen of men!  Thou huntress dread!
      Thou crowned demon of the crownless dead!
    O breasts of blood, too bitter and too tender!
      Unseen of gentle spring,
      Let me the offering
      Bring to thy shrine's sepulchral glittering!
    I slay the swart beast!  I bestow the bloom
    Sown in the dusk, and gathered in the gloom
      Under the waning moon,
        At midnight hardly lightening the East;
    And the black lamb from the black ewe's dead womb
      I bring, and stir the slow infernal tune
        Fit for thy chosen priest.

    Here where the band of Ocean breaks the road
      Black-trodden, deeply-stooping, to the abyss,
      I shall salute thee with the nameless kiss
    Pronounced toward the uttermost abode
      Of thy supreme desire.
      I shall illume the fire
      Whence thy wild stryges shall obey the lyre,  {177A}
    When thy Lemurs shall gather and spring round,
    Girdling me in the sad funereal ground
      With faces turned back,
        My face averted!  I shall consummate
    The awful act of worship, O renowned
      Fear upon earth, and fear in hell, and black
        Fear in the sky beyond Fate!


    I hear the whining of thy wolves!  I hear
      The howling of the hounds about thy form,
      Who comest in the terror of thy storm,
    And night falls faster ere thine eyes appear
      Glittering through the mist.
      Of face of woman unkissed
      Save by the dead whose love is taken ere they wist!
    Thee, thee I call!  O dire one!  O divine!
    I, the sole mortal, seek thy deadly shrine,
      Pour the dark stream of blood,
        A sleepy and reluctant river
    Even as thou drawest, with thine eyes on mine,
      To me across the sense-bewildering flood
        That holds my soul for ever!


            The night falls back;
              The shadows give place;
               The threefold form
            Appears in the black,
              As a direful face
                Half seen in the storm.
            I worship, I praise
            The wonderful ways
            Where the smitten rays
              Of darkness sunder.
            The hand is lifted;
            The gates are rifted;
              The sound is as thunder!
            She comes to the summons,
            Her face as a woman's,
              Her feet as a Fear's,
            Turned back on her path
            For a sign of wrath: --
              She appears, she appears!  {177B}
            I step to the river.
            The lyre-strings quiver;
            The limbs of me shudder;
              So cold is the mist;
                So dark is the stream;
                  So fearful the boat;
            So horrid the rudder;
              So black is the tryst;
                So frightful the beam;
                  So fearing to float;
            The steersman so dread,
    The shadowy shape of a ghost that guides the bark of the dead!


            Aged and foul,
              His locks wreathe about him.
            Horrid his scowl!
                Haggard his soul!
                My songs control
            While they fear him and doubt him.
            I step in the boat,
              And the waters ache,
              And the old boards shake.
            I shall hardly float,
              So heavy the soul
                Of a living man
              On those waters that roll
            Nine times around
            The fatal ground;
    Yet still to my singing we move on the river Tartarean.


            So darker and colder
              The stream as we float:
                Blacker and bleaker,
                  The mist on the river!
            Stronger the shoulder
              Impels the sad boat.
                Sadder and weaker
                  Shudder and quiver
            The notes of the lyre.
            Quenched is my fire
              In the fog of the air.
            Dim my desire
              Cuts through the snare.
            The cold confounds me; {178A}
            The mist surrounds me;
              Life trembles and lowers;
            Earth fades from my life.
            The love of my wife,
              The light of the flowers,
              Earth's beautiful bowers.
            Pass, and are not.
    I am awed by the soul of the place, the hopeless, the desolate spot.


            Here is the wharf
              Wearily standing,
            Misshapen and dwarf,
              Well fit for such landing!
            Darker the bloom
              Of the night-flowers glows,
            Shadowing the tomb,
              The indicible woes.
              Dark and unlovely the cypress still grows
            Deformed and blistered,
              Stunted and blackened,
            Where the dead gleams glistered,
              The dusk-lights slackened.
            Such is the shore
              Who reacheth may never
              Return o'er the river!
            Here pace evermore
              The terrible ghosts
            Malignant of men,
              Whose airless hosts
                In wars unjust
            Went down to the den;
                Whose fury and lust
            Turned poison or steel
              On their own bad lives.
            Here whirls the grim wheel
              Where the dead soul strives
            Ever to climb
              To the iron nave,
            Find Space and Time,
              Or a God to save,
              Or a way o'er the wave.
            The Fate contrives
            That he never thrives.
              Revolving anon,
              The gleam is gone,
            And the shadowy smile {178B}
            Of Hecate darkens.
            My sad soul hearkens;
              Moves fearfully on: --
    O place of all places discrowned!  Lamenting, I linger awhile!


            But fronting me tearful,
              Me full of lament,
            Shoots up the fearful
                Den of the hound.
              Ages they spent,
            Gods, in the graving
                That cavern profound,
            That temple of hate,
              Of horror and craving: --
            O who shall abate
              The moaning, the raving?
            Dark the dull flame
              Of the altar, the flood
              Of the black lamb's blood!
            But who shall proclaim
              That his soul can descry
    The depth of that cavern immense where the guardian of Orcus may lie?


            Sleepest thou, devil?
            Monster of evil!
              Spawn of Typhon
                By Echidna's lust!
            The hateful revel
                In blood and dust!
              The obscene crone
            And the monster's terror!
              The hideous thrust
                Of an unclean thirst
            In the halls of error!
              Expunged and accurst,
            A lapping of hate,
              A bride-bed rotten,
            And thou, miscreate
              And misbegotten!

            O Hecate, hear me!
              The terrors awaken,
              The cavern is shaken
                With horrible groanings.
                Cryings and moanings
            And howlings draw near me.  {179A}
            I tremble, I fear me!
              My lyre is forsaken.
            The heart of the hollow
              Is helpless to bear
            The notes of Apollo
              Through Stygian air.

            But heavier shrieking
              Revolves and resounds
              In the ghastly profounds;
            And the voice unspeaking
                Of the hound of the damned
              Runs eager, and bounds,
                Malignantly crammed
            In my ears, and the noise
            Of infernal joys
              In the houses of sin: --
    Let me pass to a drier place, to the terrors unspoken within!

            Dead silence succeeds
              The sound of the prayer.
                Again the loud lyre
            Shudders and bleeds
              In the desolate air
                With a sound as of fire!
            The hound recedes;
              But the gates stand there,
                Barring desire,
            Barring the way
              Of the dead unburied,
                Unshrived, and unblessed;
            They stand and pray
              In legions serried,
                Beating the breast,
              Tearing the hair,
                Rending the raiment.
              There is none to care.
                No golden payment
            Availeth at all.
            There is none to call;
              There is none to pity:
            They stand in their pain
              At the gate of the city.
                There is none to feel
              Or give relief;
            They are lost; they are vain;
              They are eaten of grief.  {179B}
            They are sore afraid,
              They are weary with care.
            There is none to aid.
                There is none to pity.
              They wail in despair
                At the gate of the city.

            But I, shall I halt
              At the thrice-barred portal
            In the lampless vault,
              I, half an immortal?
            By love of my mother,
              By might of my lyre,
                By Nature's assistance,
            I, I, not another
              Demand my desire,
                Rebuke your resistance,
            By mighty Apollo
              Whose power yet abides,
            Though his light may not follow
              Through Stygian tides!
            By my power over things
              Both living and dead,
                By my influence splendid
                  In heavenly court,
            The song of me springs.
              My favour is dread.
                Be your portals rended!
                  Your bolts be as nought!
            The ethereal kings
              Encompass my head.
                My soul hath transcended
                  The limits of thought!
            Unbar me the gates!
              Revolve me the hinges!
            Mine be the Fate!
              Mine be the springes
            Wherein ye have taken
            The spirits forsaken!
              But I, shall I quail at a nod?
              Shall I fail for a God?
            Is the soul of me shaken?

            Darklier winding
              And steeper the way,
            Baffling and binding
              Eyes used to the day.  {180A}
            Bocks cloven by thunder
              And shattered by storm
            Awry or asunder
              Rise and reform
            In marvellous coils
              Round the adamant road
            Whose tangles and toils
              Lead on the abode,
            Where dwell in the light
              Of justice infernal
            The judges that smite,
            That judge men aright,
              Whose laws are eternal!
            Those kings that in reigning
            For bribing or feigning
              Swerved never an hair
            From justice and truth;
              Turned never a care
            To wrath or to ruth;
              Did justice, and died.

            Thither I haste
              To face the austere
                Faces of peace.
                Shall the lyre cease?
            Its music be waste?
              Themselves not hear?
    I stride to the presence and sing: and my soul is not conquered of fear.

    Now the road widens and grows darker still
      As if the shadow of some ancient tower
    Cast its deep spell on the reluctant will.

    Still tortuous winds the deep descent; the hour
      Lies bitterer on my soul: I fear to fail,
    To loose in vain the lyre's dissolving power

    On the white souls armed in that triple mail
      Of justice, virtue, truth: percipience
    Beyond the mute and melancholy veil

    That covers from the drowsy eye of sense
      The subtle thought that hides behind the mask.
    I fear indeed: but now the soul intense {180B}

    Of truth precedes me and informs the task
      Of the steep ways: I gladden and go on
    Ready to sing, to answer, or to ask

    As all may happen: now the stern light shone
      Vivid across the blackness, and the rock
    Recedes: the narrow stair is changed and gone

    And the wide air invades: a mighty shock
      To my number senses void of vital air
    And to my lure reverberate to mock

    With changing echoes and discordant, where
      The dome reached up, almost to earth, so high
    Rolled back the pillars and the walls, aglare

    With iron justice' frightful symmetry
      Blazoned in blood-like flame, gushing from springs
    Unseen, unguessed, incredible!  There fly

    The dreaded banners of the demon kings
      In fearful colours, and the vast inane
    Dome catches music from my mouth, and rings

    Back iron curses to the blessings vain
      I pour in desperate fervour from the lyre.
    So, baffled by the echoes of hell's pain,

    Blinded by grisly glamour of hell's fire,
      I take my refuge in the solitude
    And grandeur of that irony of ire,

    That mockery of mercy: thus I brood
      Apart, alone, upon the cause of Things
    And wait those fearful Three.  A lifeless mood

    Stirs my grey being: ay! no passion springs
      In flowerless halls as these: awhile the mind
    Wanders on void unprofitable wings

    No whither: gains new strength at last to find
      Custom breed sight and hearing: in the hall
    The sounds grow clear, the black fires fail to blind. {181A}

    I see the mighty buttress of the wall
      Lost in its mighty measure: hear again
    The lyre's low notes and light distinctly fall

    A gentle influence in the place of pain.
      Oh now the central glory of the place
    Falls splendid on the unbewildered brain,

    And I am found contemplating a face
      More passionless than mortals': central sits
    Throned on pure iron, with brass for carapace,

    Minos: and either side of him befits
      The mighty Rhadamanthus throned on gold
    And canopied with silver: sternly knits

    His brows the awful AEacus, in cold
      Splendour of justice throned on carven lead;
    And o'er his head twin dragons bend and hold

    A cobra's hood made of some metal dread
      Impossible on earth: how calm, how keen
    Flash their wise eyes, those judges of the dead,

    In silent state: how eager, how serene
      Are the broad brows: the heart shrinks up and sinks,
    Seeing no gallery to slip between

    And pass those aged ones -- oft a man thinks
      He faces truth!  I know this hour, alas!
    That face to face with naked truth he shrinks.

    His web of woven fiction may not pass
      (Though he believes it to be truth) with them
    Who see his mind as though it were a glass

    Without a shadow.  Yet the ninefold gem
      And million-facet glory of my song
    Glittering, made splendid in the diadem

    Of flashing music shall assoil the wrong,
      A finer truth interpret.  Though the heart
    And core of music hold a poisonous throng {181B}

    Of lies -- yet, sing it to sufficient Art,
      The lie abolishes itself -- the tune
    Redeems the darkness -- the keen flashes start

    Of truth availing though the midnight moon
      Darken, the stars be quenched in utter cloud,
    And the high sun eclipsed at very noon.

    So flash I back the glory calm and proud
      Irradiating the Three.  So shall my lure
    Sweep the vast courts with acclamation loud

    Of splashing music, of exulting fire
      That revels in its penetrating cover
    Of azure life that smites its flickering spire

    Of sworded splendour inwards, to discover
      Not justice, not discernment, not desire,
    Not passion, but the sheer will of a lover!

                      MINOS.
          Substantial, stern, and strong,
          Who lifts an alien lyre?
          Confounds our echoes dire
          With strange and stubborn song?

                      AEACUS.
          Here in the House of Dole
          Where shadows hardly dare
          Stand, who doth deem to fare
          Forth from the outer air
          Mortal, a strenuous soul?

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          The large and lordly land
          Fertile of earth hath sent
          With dolorous intent
          Some shape or element.
          What spell of might hath rent
          The veil of Hell, and bent
          Death's purpose to his hand?

                      MINOS.
      What shaft from the bow of Apollo?  {182A}

                      AEACUS.
          What quiver of wonder
      Hath cleft the black walls of the hollow

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          What terror?

                      MINOS.
                         What thunder
      Hath shaken Hell's gates to the base?

                      AEACUS.
      Withstanding the guards to their face?

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          Hath rent him asunder
      The portals of Dis in his wrath?

                      MINOS.
          Hath made for his will
      An arrow of light for his path?

                      AEACUS.
          Left stagnant and chill
      The waters of Styx unappeased?
      The keys of our prison hath he seized.

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          A mortal!

                      MINOS.
                        An ill
      Most alien to Heaven, by Zeus!

                      AEACUS.
          But impiety's doom,
      By Poseidon, shall fill for his use
          No well-omened tomb.

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
      By Hades, our dogs let us loose!
          Let death in the gloom
      Bring peace to the Hall of the dead!  {182B}

                      MINOS.
          A passionate being!
      No weal to the light of his head
          In the place of the seeing!

                      AEACUS.
      Awake, wild justice of dread!
          Lest shadows be fleeing
      In fear of the portent to lurk
          In a deeper-detested
      Cave, ere we wake to the work.

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          Black snakes many-crested,
      Arise! lest the calm of the murk
          From our places be wrested.

                      MINOS.
      Who art thou?

                      AEACUS.
                       What ails thee to irk
          From earth tender-breasted
      To the milkless dugs of the grave
          And the iron breasts of the pit?

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
      Can a bodily presence save
          Against a shadowy wit?

                      MINOS.
      Thy hope doth dwell, O slave,
          Where thy mother fashioned it,
      Oh heart of a fool, in thy breast.

                      AEACUS.
          Away, away to the skies!

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
      That our dead may take their rest.

                      MINOS.
          Arise to the air, arise!

                      AEACUS.
      Away to the mountain crest!  {183A}

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          Veil, veil from the awful eyes!

                      MINOS.
      Endure thy heart as it may,
          And steel thine heart,
      Thou shalt hear and know and obey
          As I say "Depart";
      Lest the arrow find its way
          And the sternly-shapen dart.

                      AEACUS.
      A second our justice waits.

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          It falleth anon.

                      MINOS.
      O fool of hopes and hates
          Arise and begone!

                      AEACUS.
      O toy of the mirthless fates!
          Who art thou to con
    The mysteries of the dead in the back-souled bastion?

           MINOS, AEACUS, RHADAMANTHUS.
    Away! away! to the light of day!
        Now as it may: then as it must.
    We are loath to pardon, and loath to slay,
        Void of greed and anger and lust, --
    But we are iron and thou art clay;
        We are marble and thou but dust.

                     ORPHEUS.
    O iron, bow to silver's piercing note!
      O marble, see the shape of ivory!
    My justice fountains from a sweeter throat;
      My death is bound beyond eternity.

    O wise and just, hear ye the voice of man,
      Not seeking to involve in woven spells
    Or trickery the decree Tartarean,
      By words to blink that justice which is Hell's!  {183B}

    I came indeed before this awful throne
      To seek a party favour, but I wait
    Shuddering and silent, steadfast and alone,
      And change my music at the call of Fate.

    For while ye spake in tumult, in this ear
      A music rang from earth's remotest mine,
    From star and comet, flaming wheel and sphere,
      From Hell's deep vault and from the House divine.

    A voice diverse, a voice identical
      Called me this hour from bitterest woes and black,
    Constraining eloquence and mighty thrall
      Of cosmic agony, and wrung me back

    From my poor plea to challenge in my song
      The whole domain of deeply-seated law,
    Launch thunders not Olympic at the strong
      Bars of the Order backed with strength and awe

    That men call Will of Zeus: the after scheme
      And primal fate and most primoridal plan
    Shaped from the earth's first protoplasmic dream
      Up to the last great mischief that is man.

    All this I challenge: that the suns and stars
      Work in due order and procession meet
    Without caprice in viewless, changeless bars,
      Nor self-determinate in their wingless feet.

    All nature and all consciousness and thought
      He hath thrown asunder and divided them;
    Fixing a gulf of agony athwart,
      Where rolls a tide no soul of man may stem.

    Himself fixed high, he mocked us with his name
      Of "reconciler," and of "one beyond all";
    And cast his shadow to the deep, to shame
      That oneness in its own division's thrall;  {184A}

    So that Himself appears in cloud and fire
      Distorted in the world's distorted mirror;
    And dark convulsion and confusion dire
      Stands for his form of error and of terror.

    But I perceive, I Orpheus, Lord of Song,
      And every Lord of Song that me shall follow
    Down steeps of time's own agony and wrong,
      Shall see the lightning bridge the dreadful hollow

    With jagged flame of master-music, hear
      The blind curse thunder forth against in vain
    When the swift glory of the rolling sphere
      Of song pours forth its utterance, keen with pain,

    Mad with delight, and calm beyond woe and pleasure.
      Yea, every son of this my soul shall know
    In the swift concourse of his music's measure
      One thing impatient of this to and fro

    March of hell's dancers.  I perceive a key
      To lock the prison of the world on him
    That built the iron walls and made decree
      Long past in aeons now grown gray and dim,

    Like halls ancestral whence their folk have fled,
      The marbles all are broken, and the weeds
    Grown o'er the bones of the unquiet dead,
      And time's remorse avails not on its deeds.

    I see that time is one: future and past
      Are but one present; space is one, the North
    And South and all the sixfold shame holds fast
      No more: the poet's fiat hath gone forth

    And tamed the masters of division.  Me
      Nor sun can burn, nor moon make mad, nor time
    Alter: I drown not in the deepest sea,
      Nor choke where icy mountain ridges climb {184B}

    The steeps of heaven; but these, these children, cry
      Their bitter cry for justice.  Mighty Ones,
    Lords of the Dusk, incline ye, mercifully,
      Rightly, to misery of all stars and suns

    And planets and all grains of dust that sorrow --
      Hark! from grim Tartarus, most doleful bound,
    Their throats of anguish notes of triumph borrow
      At my loud strain's unprofitable sound.

    For who are ye?  Poor judges of the dead,
      In your stern eyes the sadness is mine own,
    Mingled with sense that all your forces dread
      Are vain to take the spirit from one stone.

    I would have called to ye in wild strong joy;
      "Arise, O Lords of Justice, and be girt
    With lightnings, and be ardent to destroy
      This Fool's creation and to heal its hurt

    With swift annihilation!"  Ye are vain,
      Alas! poor powers!  But yet the damned rejoice
    Hearing the splendour, prophet in my strain,
      And certain comfort in my mighty voice.

    For this shall be, that in the utter end
      Shall be an end, that in the vast of time
    Shall come a ceasing, and the steel bar bend
      Of the God's will, himself from his sublime

    Pinnacled house in heaven headlong cast
      Like his own thunder to the abyss of nought
    When space and time and being shall be past,
      And the grim thinker perish with his thought.

    Therefore I leave in hands unshakable
      The destinies of being, and care not
    For all the miseries of the damned in hell,
      Or the vain gods' unenviable lot.  {185A}

    I leave the cry of chaos, and recall
      My private pang and woe particular,
    One drop of water by mischance let fall
      From some white slave's divinely carven jar.

    O Lords of justice, universal woe
      Hath yet its shadows in a singer's soul,
    He feels the arrow from a party bow
      Who yet hath strength to struggle with the whole.

    I love my wife.  The many-coloured throne
      Of Grecian meadows hath nor charm nor lure
    Now she is gone.  Lamenting and alone
      My dulled heart aches, most that it must endure.

    Give this decree, O masters!  Few the days
      And light the hours since Heracles descended
    The dusky steep, the intolerable ways,
      And one prey -- Theseus -- from your prisons rended

    By might of godhead and the skill of man.
      But now with music from a Muse's breast
    Sweetened with milk of tenderness, I scan
      Your eyes with hope, and with a man's unrest

    And a man's purpose I appeal.  Be just,
      O ye whom greater justice baulks and bars!
    Return my lover from the unkind dust
      To the sweet light of the eternal stars!

    Be kind, and from the unjust place of fear
      Return by kindness her, the innocent one,
    From the grey places to the waters clear
      And meadows fair, and light of moon and sun!

    Relent.  Reverse the doom.  I see your eyes
      Quiver despite ye: but your hands ye wring;
    Little by little bitter tears arise
      Like stubborn water from a frozen spring, {185B}

    And deep unrest is seated in your limbs.
      Ye pitty me.  Ye pity.  Mute and weak
    With the long trouble of persistent hymns
      I bow myself and listen while ye speak.

                      MINOS.
          Brethern, what need of wonder
          That Hell is burst asunder
    Shaken from base to brow, as if with Zeus' own thunder?
          What wonder if our peace
          Broke, and our mysteries
    Quaked at the presence of these solemnities?

                      AEACUS.
          Child of the earth and heaven,
          Our spirits thou has riven
    With words we must admit, with power of song -- whence given?
          Neither of God nor man,
          Thy song's amazing span
    Hath caused strange joy among the woes Tartarean.

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          Never in the centuries
          Till godlike Heracles
    Burst the wild bonds, hath mortal found the fatal knees;
          Nor hath the bitter cry
          Of worlds in agony
    Answered the groans of those who weep, and cannot die.

                      MINOS.
          Iron of heart and strong,
          We also suffer wrong.
    We know these words are just.  We avail not.  Though thy song
          Were the sole word of Zeus,
          Should that avail to loose
    The bands of Being firm, invulnerable dews
          Tincturing its bitter brass,
          Shielding its vital mass
    From every word that cries, "Thus, and thy day shall pass."  {186A}

                      AEACUS.
          Typhon!  Typhon!  Typhon!
          Heard ye that awful moan
    Leap through the blackness from the miserable throne?
          Vain as each pallid ghost,
          Where is thy fatal boast,
    Destroyer named of old on Khem's<<1>> disastrous coast?
          Old power of evil curled
          Below the phantom world,
    Canst thou destroy, whose might to misery is hurled?

<<1. Egypt.>>

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          What god beyond these twain
          Abides or may remain
    Seated, too strong to quell, exalted over pain?
          Aloof from time and chance,
          Fate, will and circumstance,
    Canst thou not wither Life with one indignant glance?
          Thy name we know not; Thine
          Is the unbuilded shrine.
    We doubt us if Thou be among the powers divine!

                      MINOS.
          Bound by strict line and law,
          Fearful with might and awe,
          We hold the powerless power
          For many an aged hour.
          We move not from our place.
          We ask nor give not grace,
    Nor change our lordly looks before a suppliant's face.

                      AEACUS.
          Stern in all justice, we
          Assent aloud to thee,
          We affirm thy cause as right:
          We put forth all the might
          Of aid: and all is done.
          Out utmost power is none
    To lift one soul to live and look upon the sun.  {186B}

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          For righteous thought and deed
          Apportioning its meed;
          For evil act and mind
          Rewarding in its kind;
          So sit we: but our power
          Apportions not an hour
    To light the dying lamp, revive the faded flower.

                      MINOS.
          Be thou, be strong to sing!

                      AEACUS.
          Loose arrows from the string!

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          Bid the wild word take wing!

                      MINOS.
          Hades hath evil fame
          To suppliants -- bitter shame! --
          Inexorable.

                      AEACUS.
                              Aim
          Yet the swift prayer, abide
          His word whate'er betide.
          What worse?

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
                       The Gods thy guide!
          Go and assail him!

                      MINOS.
                                Stay,
          The Queen of Hell!

                      AEACUS.
                                 That way
          Leads to the light of day.

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          A woman's heart may yearn,
          To a man's love may turn.  {187A}

                      MINOS.
          Should she, the ravished, spurn
          A man whose love is reft?

                      AEACUS.
          Meadows and flower, she left
          To Him -- O bosom cleft
          With a wife's loss! -- a wife.

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          Too doubtful is the strife.

                      MINOS.
          Yet go! perchance to life.

                      AEACUS.
          Go! and the Gods above
          Guard thee, O soul of love!

                  RHADAMANTHUS.
          I doubt me much thereof.

                     ORPHEUS.
    Ah me!  I find ye but ill counsellors.
    For I will conquer.  Have I spent these stores
    Of will and song for nought?  Hell's heart may rend,
    But mine endureth even to the end.

    Severe and righteous Lords, O fare ye well!
    Are not my feet forced forward on a road
    Leading to innermost abodes of Hell

    Exalted as above the green abode
    Of nymphs on broad Olympus, raises high
    Its head the kingly snow, gigantic load

    Of sombre whiteness cleaving through the sky
    For gods to dwell in?  So I pass the hall
    And seek the gloomy thrones of majesty,

    Where I may pledge my last despairing call
    Unto the mightiest of the House of Dread,
    And loosen Death's inexorable thrall  {187B}

    And bring my lover from among the dead.
    Now in the blackness of the rocks that span
    The dolorous way I spy a golden thread

    Veined in the strength of the obsidian
    Flowing and growing, joining vein to vein,
    Like fresh blood in the arteries of man,

    Up to the very heart.  And as I go
    Loosen the knees of anguish and grow dim
    The shattering flames of pain: the songs of woe

    Flicker and alter to a solemn hymn
    Chanted in slowest measure in deep awe.
    Now as a yew-tree sends a mighty limb

    Shooting to sunset, the black road's black maw
    Gapes to the westward; the great trunk divides
    And all the armies of infernal law

    Stand ranked about the venerable sides
    Of the black cave: they speak not; dumb they stand
    And all the frost of all the air abides

    Upon them, as a vampire stooped and spanned
    The white throat of a maiden and held still
    Her powers by virtue of its hate's command,

    Somewhat like love's: so all the solemn chill
    Invades those statued ranks of warriors,
    And I pass through, the lightning of my will

    A steady stream of flame: high instinct pours
    Its limpid light of water on my mind,
    So that I range inhospitable shores

    Assured of Her I shall most surely find
    Ere the end be: awake, O living lyre,
    Since in the narrow way and pass confined

    I see a darkness infinite as fire,
    Clear as all spirit vision, lustrous yet
    As ebony shows in caverns rendered dire {188A}

    By dreadful magic, or as if pure jet
    Had taken of itself an inner light,
    And its own blackness filled night's coronet

    With a new jewel: so I see aright
    Where no light is like earth's.  The path grows broad
    And lofty, till the whole hall springs to sight,

    And I am standing where the dreaded Lord
    And Lady of the region of the lost
    Hold awful sway: yet here the flaming sword

    Of sight is broken by the deadly frost
    That clusters round their thrones: a mist of fire
    Congealed to vital darkness: yet exhaust

    Like a seer's magic glass of air: expire
    The dumb black hours in fear: but I am ware,
    Well ware, by instinct surer still and higher

    Than the own sight of soul that they are there,
    No mockery of their presence: so even hither
    My mother's might is on me, on I flare

    Into wild war of song: my keen notes wither
    The flowers of frost about me and I turn
    Ever the strength and mastering frenzy thither

    With energy of madness: yea, I burn!
    My soul burns up upon the lyre!  I lend
    My whole life's vigour to one song, to earn

    Their guerdon of the gods, a god to friend,
    And seek through devious ways a single end.

                                 ["Invoking" HADES.

                     "Str." 1.
    Now is the gold gone of the year, and gone
      The glory of the world, and gathered close
      The silver of the frost.  Far splendid snows
    Shine where the bright anemone once shone.
      Ay! for the laughter live
      Of youths and maids that strive {188B}
    In amorous play, the ancient saws of eld
      And wisdom mystical
      From bearded lips must fall,
    Old eyes behold what young eyes ne'er beheld:
    Namely, the things beyond the triple veil
      Of space and time and cause, eternal woof
      Of misery overproof:
    And aged thoughts assail
      The younger hopes, and passion stands aloof,
    And silence takes possession, and the tale
      Of earth is told and done.
    Then from the Sire of all the Gods, from War
      And Love and Wisdom and the eternal Sun
    Worship is torn afar:
      While unto Thee, O Hades, turn we now,
      Awful of breast and brow,
    And hear thee in the sea, behold thee in the Star.

           "Ant." 1 ["Echo of the Damned"].
    Ay! is the earth and upper ether gone,
      And all the joy of earth, and gathered close
      The darkness and the death-wind and the snows
    On us on whom the sun of air once shone.
      What souls are left alive
      Vainly lament and strive,
    For they shall join the dead of utmost eld;
      The concourse mystical
      Who see the seasons fall
    Shall soon behold what all we have beheld: --
    The accursed stream, the intolerable veil
      Of night and death and hell, disastrous woof
      Of anguish overproof
    That fruitless wills assail
      Ever in vain: good fortune stands aloof
    And all kind gods: we, taking up the tale
      Of dead men past and done,
    Declare that ceaseless is the eternal war,
      And victory stedfast set against the Sun.
    Yet we perceive afar
      Even in Hades, at the end, not now,
      Some light upon his brow,
    Some comfort in the sea, some refuge in the Star.  {189A}

                     "Str." 2.
    O thou! because thy chariot is golden,
      And beautiful thy coursers, and their manes
        Flecked with such foam as once upon the sea
    Bore Aphrodite, and thy face is olden,
      Worn with dim thought and unsuspected pains,
        And all thy soul fulfilled of majesty;
    Because the silence of thy house is great,
    And thy word second spoken after Fate,
    And thy light stricken of thine own grim hand;
    Because thy whisper exceedeth the command
    Of Zeus; thy dim light far outshines his glory;
      Because, as He the first is, Thou the last: --
        Therefore I take up sorrow in my hands,
    And ply thine ear with my most doleful story,
      Asking a future, who have lost a past:
        A guerdon of my singing like the land's
    When spring breaks forth from winter, and the blood
    Of the old earth laughs in every new-born bud.

           "Ant." 2 ["Echo of the Damned"].
    O thou! because thy lyre is keen and golden
      And beautiful thy numbers through our veins
        Pouring delight, as on the starry sea
    Burn gems of rapture; though the houses olden
      Relax awhile their unredeeming pains,
        And through dead slaves thrill bounteous majesty?
    Though the strong music of thy soul be great: --
    Shall thy desire avail to alter Fate?
    Or impious hands unloose the awful hand?
    Or futile words reverse the great command?
    Or what availeth?  Though great Hades' glory
      Stoop to thy prayer, and answer thee at last,
        Should Clotho catch the thread in weaving hands, {189B}
    Respin what Atropos once cut -- that story
      Were vain for thee -- that which is past is past,
        Nor can Omnipotence avail the land's
    Death -- Spring's is alien through ancestral blood,
    And a new birth is current in the bud.

                     "Str." 3.
    Think, then, the deed impossible is done
      Since Theseus fared forth to the ambient air!
    His thread once cut -- was that indeed respun
      Or patched by witchery? a deceit? a snare?
    I tell ye; past and future are but one,
      And present -- nothing; shall not Hades dare
    His own omnipotence against the Sun,
      And let no tittle of his glory share
    With all the earth's recuperating wheel,
    And every dawn's sure falchion-flash of steel?

          "Ant." 3. ["Echo of the Damned"].
    Indeed, a deed impossible was done
      Were the new Theseus heavier than the air.
    Nay! but a new thread phantom-frail was spun
      And men's blind eyes discovered not the snare,
    Else were that elder cord and this yet one,
      Cut but in fancy.  Yet, shall mortal dare
    To fling a wanton word against the Sun,
      And stand forth candidate for lot and share
    Where hangs Prometheus, rolls Ixion's wheel,
    And the stone rolls upon the limbs of steel?

                      "Epode."
    These echoes, in my mind foul torturers,
      Present my fears, and image my distrust.
    No answer comes, no voice the silence stirs
      With joyful "may" or melancholy "must."
    Nor, though the gloom requicken, may I see
      Hades enthroned, my prayers who heedeth nought,  {190A}
    Nor glowing tear of bowed Persephone
      Drooped earthward for the ninefold misery wrought.
    In utter sorrow ever bound she stays,
      Hears not my song, nor heedeth anything,
    Whose mind lamenting turns to ancient days
      And Nysian meadows and the hour of spring.
    Yea, but perchance to touch that secret chord
      Were to awake that sorrow into life;
    Sting, as a wound a deep-envenomed sword,
      The inmost soul of the Aidonean wife.
    Listen!  I tune my music to that hour;
      The careless maidens and the virgin laughter,
    The bloom of springtide and the fatal flower,
      And all that joy the sorrow echoing after.
    So that, dread Hades, thou mayst hear and yield,
      Thyself unmastered and inexorable,
    The gentle maid as crying in that field,
      Now thy soul's keeper on the throne of Hell!
    Hail, Hades!  Thou who hearest not my song,
      Repealest not the heaven's unjust decree,
    Revengest not for me the woe and wrong,
      Shalt glean my sorrow from Persephone.
    Hail, Hades!  In the gloom the echoing cry
      Swells, and the chorus darkens as I sing,
    And all the fibres of Eternity
      Shake as I loose the loud indignant string.
    Hail, Hades! hear thy wrong proclaimed aloud,
      And thou the wronger safe because too great.
    To like offence harden thy neck, and proud
      Blow thou the dismal challenge unto Fate!

    In Asia, on the Nysian plains, she played,
        A slender maid,
    With the deep-bosomed Oceanides;
        Where the tall trees
    Girded the meadow with grave walls of green.
        Alone, unseen,
    The tender little lady strayed,
        Moving across the breeze.  {190B}
    It was a meadow of soft grass and flowers,
        Where the sweet hours
    Lingered and laughed awhile ere noon reposes.
        There were red roses
    And crocus, and flag-flowers, and violets,
        And hyacinth, regrets
    Of the ill-fortuned God, the quoit-player;
        And soft cool air
    Stirred all the field -- and there were jessamines
        And snaky columbines.
    So all these maidens played, and gathered them
        From sad green stem
    Rejoicing blooms with sunlight mixed therein.
        But she, for sin
    And iron heart of the ill-minded Zeus,
        Caught up the dews
    Deep on her ankles, and went noiselessly
        Toward the laughing sea,
    And sought new blossoms -- O the traitor, Earth,
        That brought to birth
    That day, as favouring the desire that swelled
        Beneath her heart of eld,
    Where dwelt the lonely, the detested one
        Intolerant of the sun,
    Hades!  But Earth for love of him, for spite
        Of the young girl's delight,
    And shame of her own age, brought forth that hour
        The fatal flower,
    Narcissus -- which what soul of man shall smell
        Goes down to hell,
    Caught in the scent of sin -- for such a doom
        Demeter's flying loom
    Hath woven for revenge and punishment.
        The bright child went
    Thither; an hundred heads of blossom sprang;
        The green earth sang,
    And the skies laughed, and danced the sea's young feet
        For joy of it.
    So the child went across that fairest plain
        To pluck, to strain {191A}
    That blossom of all blossoms to her heart,
        Her long hands dart,
    Exceeding delicate and fair, to cull
        That bloom too beautiful,
    Eager to gather the fresh floral birth.
        The grim black earth
    Gaped; roared athwart the gulf the golden car;
        And flaming far
    The four white horses with their flashing manes!
        The might-resisting reins
    Lay in the ghastly hands, the arms of fear
        Of that dread charioteer,
    Death; and great Hades armed stood glittering,
        Stooped to his spring,
    And whirled the child to the beneath abode.
        O heavy load!
    O bitter harvest of rich-rolling tears!
        What cry who hears?
    A shrill shrill cry to father Zeus cried she,
        Forlorn Persephone!
    Heard was that agony of grief by none
        Save only by the Sun,
    And Her who sat within her awful cave,
        Contemplative and grave,
    Hecate, veiled with a shining veil
        Utterly frail
    As the strange web of dainty thoughts she wove,
        Somewhat like love.
    She heard, and great Apollo: neither stayed
        Hades, nor stretched to aid
    A pitying hand.  O pitiful!  O grief
       Baffling belief!
    The gentle child -- the cruel god -- Ah me!
        Persephone!
    Thus of thy grace, thy sorrow, thy young way
        Torn from the day
    Of all thy memory of soft shining flowers
        And happy-hearted hours,
    Mayst thou be very pitiful to me
        Who aye have pitied thee,
            Persephone!  {191B}

                   PERSEPHONE.
    Ah me!  I feel a stirring in my blood.
    Pours through my veins a delicate pale flood
    Of memory.  Not the pale and terrible
    Goddess whose throne is manifest in Hell
    -- I am again a child, a playful child.

                     ORPHEUS.
    And therefore, O most beautiful and mild
    Sweet mother! art the girl beloved again
    Of Hades mighty on the Nysian plain.
    And therefore are thine eyes with sorrow dim
    For me, and thy word powerful with him.

                   PERSEPHONE.
        Ah me! no fruit for guerdon,
        Who bore the blossom's burden;
    There shines no sunlight toward Persephone.
        Ravished, O iron-eyed!
        From my young sisters' side,
    Torn and dragged down below the sundered sea,
        No joy is mine in all thy bed,
        And all thy sorrow shaken on my head.

        Cursed above gods be thou
        Whose blind unruffled brow
    Rules the grim place of unsubstantial things!
        Hated, to me thy face
        Turns not the glance of grace.
    I rule unloved above the infernal kings,
        And only thee in all deep Hell
        I charm in vain, despair my royal spell.

        By might of famine long
        And supplication strong
    Demeter won the swift Hermetic word:
        In bitter days of eld
        Thus by great force compelled
    The glad earth saw me, careless of my lord,
        Rise to her crystal streams and sapphire seas,
        And Theseus thus owed life to Heracles.  {192A}

        Thou mockest me with power;
        Thy sceptre's awful dower
    Avails me nothing.  Shall a mortal bring
        Such pity wrapped in song
        And Echo's choral throng
    Of all things live and dead to hear me sing; --
        And I by pity moved and love
        Have not thy voice to grant him grace thereof?

        Inexorable Lord!
        Accursed and abhorred
    Of men, begin in Hell to show thy grace!
        Not to a man's weak life,
        Not to thy shuddering wife,
    But to the queen's unfathomable face
        Dread beyond sorcery and prayer,
        And fearful even because it is so fair!

        Yea, from the ghastly throne
        Unchallenged and unknown
    Let the fierce accents roll athwart the skies!
        My voice is given, my power
        Fares forth to save the flower
    Broken but plucked not by these fingers wise.
        I love the song -- be thou not mute,
        But turn a lucky lot towards the suit!

                     ORPHEUS.
            In vain, O thou veiled
              Immutable queen!
            Thy strong voice bewailed,
              Thy fair face was seen!
            It flushed up and paled;
              The song echoed clean --
    But alas! for the veil of the night and the fear that is ever between!

            Of pity unfilled
              And void of remorse,
            He moves unappealed
              In the terrible course.
            But the lyre is unchilled: --
              By force unto force
    He shall answer me power unto power at the source of its source!  {192B}

            Dost thou hear how the weight
              Of the earth and the moon
            Shudder, as if fate
              Were involved in the tune?
            The portals of hate
              Shake at the rune
    Of the magical nature-cry, the song from the mountains hewn!

            To the horrible hollow
              In Tartarus steep,
            O song of me, follow!
              I flee to the deep.
            That word of Apollo
              Shall shudder and leap;
    That word in the uttermost night shall awake them who know not of sleep.

            Hear, O ye Three,
              In the innermost pit
            Dwellers that be!
              Tartarus, split!
            Arise unto me
              For I call ye with wit
    Of the words that constrain and compel, of the summons ordered and fit!

            O daughter of Earth,
              Tisiphone dread,
            The ophidian girth,
              And the blood-dripping head,
            In hideous mirth
              Bring living and dead
    To torture!  Arise!  I conjure by the might of the words I have said.

            Megaera, thou terror,
              O daughter of Night
            Whose sight in a mirror
              Is death of affright,
            Winged with error,
              I chain thee, and cite
    The words that thy soul must obey if a mortal but say them aright! {193A}

            Alecto!  I call thee,
              My words ring thee round.
            My spells enwall thee.
              My lure is crowned
            With might to appal thee
              With terror profound.
    Arise!  O Alecto, arise! for my song hath compelled thee and bound.

            Ye furies of Hell!
              Ye terrors in Heaven!
            The strength of the spell
              Is as thunder at even
            The rocks of the fell
              That hath blasted and riven
    Come forth!  I invoke ye, Erinyes, the charm of the One that is seven.

            By the Five that are One,
              And the One that is Ten;
            By the snake in the sun
              And her mirror in men;
            By the four that run
              And return them again;
    By the fire that is lit in the Lion, the wave in the Scorpion den!

            By the One that is Seven,
              The whirling eyes;
            The Two made Eleven,
              The dragon's devise;
            The Eight against Heaven,
              All crowns of lies;
    Come forth!  I invoke ye, Erinyes, move, answer, take shapes and arise!

            By the cross and the wheel
              I call ye to hear;
            By the dagger of steel
              I command ye, give ear!
            By the word that ye feel,
              The summons of Fear;
    Come forth!  I invoke ye, Erinyes, move, answer, arise and appear!  {193B}

            For my purpose is swift,
              And my vengeance strong;
            I shall not shift;
              I shall cry the wrong.
            My voice I uplift
              In terrible song
    As your forms take shape before me in the likeness for which ye long.

            The shape of my passion
              And bitter distress
            Shall clothe ye, and fashion
              An equal dress.
            Ye shall force compassion
              With awful stress
    From the soul that hat mocked me, and turned his heart from my song's
        excess.

            The ruler of Hell,
              The invisible Lord,
            Hath laughed at my spell,
              Hath slept at my word.
            He hath heard me well --
              Awake, O Sword!
    Shall he flout a suppliant thus and no answer of favour accord?

            If mercy be sundered
              From splendour and power;
            If he answer with thunder
              The plaint of a flower;
            Shall justice wonder
              If Furies devour
    So bitter a heart, set a term to his date that was aye but an hour?

            Avenge me, ye forces
              Of horror and wrath!
            Clear the dread courses!
              Split open the path!
            With cruel remorse is
              His heart brought to scath.
    And a terror is on him at last, the seed of his hate's aftermath.

                     MEGAERA.
    Ha! who invokes?  What horror rages
      Here, to compel our murderous hands to smite?  {194A}

                     ALECTO.
    What mortal summons?  Who his battle wages
      So strongly as to call the seed of Night?

                    TISIPHONE.
    Ha!  The grim tyrant of despair engages
      Our deadly anguish with his useless might.

                      HADES.
    Detested fiends! avaunt!

                     MEGAERA.
                          He speaks!

                     ALECTO.
                                He thunders!

                    TISIPHONE.
    His lightnings split the living rock.

                     MEGAERA.
                                 Hell sunders
    The livid walls and iron-bound prisons of death.

                      HADES.
    Thus! to your towers and wail!

                     ALECTO.
                               He speaks!

                    TISIPHONE.
                                 His breath
    Is cold as ours.

                      HADES.
                     Depart!  Due silence keep,
    Lest I enchain ye in a fouler deep
    Than aught your horror pictures!

                     MEGAERA.
                              Dost thou hear,
    Sister?

                     ALECTO.
                Sweet sister!  {194B}

                    TISIPHONE.
                         Dost thou think we fear
    Who are all fear? or feel, who are but pain?

                     MEGAERA.
    Creep round his heart, and cluster in his brain,
    Ye serpents of my hair!

                     ALECTO.
                           His blood shall drip
    For sweet warm juice on my decaying lip.

                    TISIPHONE.
    My fearful wings enfold him!

                     ALECTO.
                                 My foul eyes
    Hold his in terror!

                     MEGAERA.
                        All my agonies
    Crawl in his vitals!

                    TISIPHONE.
                     He is mine, mine, mine!
    Pour forth of Thebes' abominable wine!
    Mine, O thou god, detested and adored!

                     MEGAERA.
    Mine! he is mine! my lover and my lord!

                     ALECTO.
    Mine!  I am in his shape!

                     MEGAERA.
                             Despair!  Dispute
    Never my passion!

                    TISIPHONE.
                      Sisters!  Be ye mute!
    I am the livid agony that starts
    Damp on his brow; the horror in his heart's
    Envenomed arteries! and I the fear,
    The torment, and the hate!  {195A}

                     MEGAERA.
                            Be of good cheer!
    Rend him apart!  Hunger and lust we sate,
    Equal in terror on that heart of hate.

                     ALECTO.
    Hell's throne be kingless!

                    TISIPHONE.
                           Mortal! is it well,
    Our vengeance on the impious lord of Hell!

                     ORPHEUS.
    Well! it is well!  And yet my eyes are wet
    To see such anguish.

                     MEGAERA.
                         Tear the fatal net!

                     ALECTO.
    Bite with strong acid his congealing blood!

                    TISIPHONE.
    Rend out the bowels!

                     MEGAERA.
                        Pour the monstrous flood
    Of unclean wisdom in his soul!

                   PERSEPHONE.
                                   Desist!

                     ALECTO.
    O face of woman wretched and unkissed,
    What hast thou here to do with us?

                    TISIPHONE.
                                   Be quiet!

                     MEGAERA.
    Quench not the fire of murder!

                     ALECTO.
                                 Loose the riot
    Of worms beneath the skull!  {195B}

                    TISIPHONE.
                                Tear wide apart
    The jaws!

                     MEGAERA.
               Force fear against the inmost heart!

                   PERSEPHONE.
    Mercy!  I plead, sweet sisters!

                     ORPHEUS.
                                 And I plead
    Vengeance, and help in my extremest need
    Pile up the torture!  Had he not the power,
    And silence mocked me?

                     MEGAERA.
                         Urge us hour by hour,
    Thou couldst not add one particle of pain.

                     ALECTO.
    He speaks not!  Bid his torture speak again!

                    TISIPHONE.
    Speak, murderer!

                     MEGAERA.
                         Hades! answer us!

                     ALECTO.
                                      Expel
    These torments from thy being, us from Hell,
    Or Zeus from Heaven!

                    TISIPHONE.
                            Or else obey!

                     MEGAERA.
                                      Obey!

                     ALECTO.
    Obey!

                      HADES.
           O throne of hell!  O night!  O day
    Of anguish exquisite beyond control,
    Fibre and substance of my inmost soul!
    There is a power not mine, and yet in me
    Burning its cold and cruel agony {196}
    With icy flames, its cutting poison fangs
    Striking my being with detested pangs.
    Alas! of me and not to be expelled,
    Conjured, assuaged, averted.  Grey as eld
    The juice of blood that stagnates in my veins
    Appals their current with avenging pains: --
    O pain!  O pitiful and hateful sense
    Of agony and grief and impotence!
    O misery of the day when Orpheus bore
    First his loud lyre across the Stygian shore!
    Hath Hell no warders?  Is the threefold gate
    Brazen in vain against the foot of Fate?
    Now is but little choice -- abase my pride,
    Or sink for ever to the gloomy tide
    Of fire beneath the utmost reach and span
    Of Stygian deeps and walls Tartarean.
    Yet I abide.

                     MEGAERA.
                    Fall!  Fall!

                     ALECTO.
                             Descend the abyss!

                    TISIPHONE.
    Link the lewd fiend with your incestuous kiss!

                     MEGAERA.
    Hither!

                     ALECTO.
                O hither!

                      HADES.
                        Steams a newer shape
    Of threefold terror.

                    TISIPHONE.
                        Shall the god escape
    The monstrous wedlock?

                     ALECTO.
                          Let him turn again
    His horrid passion to the Nysian plain!

                     MEGAERA.
    Echidna!  {196A}

                     ALECTO.
                 Mother of the Sphinx and snake
    Of Colchus, and the marsh-beast of the lake
    Lernean, of Chimaera and Hell's hound --

                    TISIPHONE.
    Answer!

                     ALECTO.
                    Arise!

                     MEGAERA.
                      Awake from the profound!

                    TISIPHONE.
    Here is a worthy partner unto thee
    To wake thy womb with monstrous progeny,
    Yet more detested and detestable
    Than all the shapeless brood of hate and Hell.

                     ECHIDNA.
    Ha! rose-lipped lover!  Welcome to this bed!

                     MEGAERA.
    She plays with words of love!

                     ALECTO.
                         Her black eyes shed
    Disease for tears.

                    TISIPHONE.
                     Her fangs and lips are red
    With gouts of putrid blood.

                     MEGAERA.
                             Her guile employs
    The sweet soft shape of words of upper joys
    More bitterly to rack his soul.

                     ALECTO.
                                Ha, sister,
    The embrace!

                    TISIPHONE.
                    She conquers.  {196A}

                     MEGAERA.
                    He hath moved.

                     ALECTO.
                          He hath kissed her!

                    TISIPHONE.
    Ha! the worse hate of hate in love's white dress.

                     MEGAERA.
    And lewdness tricked to look like loveliness.

                     ALECTO.
    Uttermost pain in pleasure's hour supreme.

                     MEGAERA.
    Hate's nightmare waking love's unreal dream.

                     ALECTO.
    Claws, teeth, and poison!

                    TISIPHONE.
                       How she plies her pest!

                     MEGAERA.
    Strangling she holds him.

                     ALECTO.
                          In the inmost breast
    Her hands defile him.

                    TISIPHONE.
                         In his rotting brain
    He teeth, her breath, pass all imagined pain.

                     MEGAERA.
    Sisters!

                     ALECTO.
                 We conquer!

                    TISIPHONE.
                      Have we power?  {197B}

                     MEGAERA.
                                The king
    Endures, and is not moved at anything.

                     ALECTO.
    He will not now relent.

                    TISIPHONE.
                    He's ours for ever!

                      HADES.
    Ai!  Ai!

                     MEGAERA.
             Hark!

                     ALECTO.
                    Listen!

                    TISIPHONE.
                      Now he yields -- or never!

                      HADES.
    Release!  Relent!

                     ECHIDNA.
                      Fair lover, let my embrace
    Still gladden thee to rapture! let my face
    Be like a garden of fresh flowers to cull,
    And all thy being and thy body full
    As mine of gentle love -- then sink to sleep!

                     MEGAERA.
    Ha!  Ha!  She mocks him!  In the utter deep,
    Her house of evil, sleep is stranger there.

                     ALECTO.
    She sings!

                    TISIPHONE.
                 The final misery!  Beware!

                     ECHIDNA.
               O tender lover!
               My wings still cover
                   Thy face, and my lips {198A}
          Are on thine, and my tresses
          Like Zephyr's caresses
               When the twilight dips.

                      HADES.
    This passes all.  Relent.  Release!  Depart!
    I yield: my power is broken, and my heart
    Riven, and all my pride ruined, and me
    Compelled to earth to loose Eurydice.

                     ORPHEUS.
    Depart!

                     ERINYES.
                Baffled!  O misery!  Bethink,
    Proud Hades, ere thy torture gar thee drink
    Humiliation's utmost dregs!

                      HADES.
                                 I spake.
    Depart ye! lest my power regained awake,
    And smite ye with a terror more than ye.

                     MEGAERA.
    We are borne on bitter winds.

                     ALECTO.
                                We sink.

                    TISIPHONE.
                                      We flee!

                     MEGAERA.
    To the abyss!

                     ALECTO.
                  Descend!

                    TISIPHONE.
                          Nor hope in vain
    The ill-hearted one shall feel our fangs again.

                     MEGAERA.
    Murder and violation, deafened ear
    To suppliants, these our friends are.  {198B}

                     ALECTO.
                        Hate and fear
    Leave not for long that bosom.

                    TISIPHONE.
                                   Now away!
    Back from this night more splendid than our day!

                     MEGAERA.
    We may not drag him down this chance.

                     ALECTO.
                                     Despair
    Not, O my sisters!

                    TISIPHONE.
                    The next suppliant's prayer
    Rejected --

                     MEGAERA.
                   Come, my sisters, we'll be there.

                      HADES.
    Well, be it so.  O wizard, by this strength
    Thou hast availed in deepest Hell at length.
    I grant thy prayer.  Eurydice be given
    To the sweet light and pleasant air of heaven!
    Even on this wise.  With Hermes for a guide
    Up the dread steeps there followeth thee thy bride,
    And thou before them singing.  If thou yearn
    Towards her, if thy purpose change or turn
    While in these realms; if thou thy face revert;
    That shall be hostage unto me for hurt
    Of further magic: she shall fade and flee
    A phantom frail throughout Eternity,
    Driven on my winds, adrift upon my seas!
    These are thy favours, and thy duties these.
    Invoke thou Hermes, and thy lyre restring!

                     ORPHEUS.
    This I accept and this shall be, O king!  {199A}

                ["Invoking" HERMES.]
    O Light in light!  O flashing wings of fire!
      The swiftest of the moments of the sea
            Is unto thee
      Even as some slow-foot Eternity
    With limbs that drag and wheels that tire.
    O subtle-minded flame of amber gyre,
      It seems a spark of gold
      Grown purple, and behold!
            A flame of gray!
      Then the dark night-wings glow
      With iridescent indigo,
            Shot with some violet ray;
    And all the vision flame across the horizon
        The millionth of no time -- and when we say:
            Hail! -- Thou art gone!

    The moon is dark beside thy crown; the Sun
        Seems a pale image of thy body bare;
        And for thine hair
        Flash comets lustrous with the dewfall rare
    Of tears of that most memorable One,
    The radiant Queen, the veiled Paphian.
        The wings of light divine
        Beneath thy body shine;
            The invisible
        Rayed with some tangible flame,
        Seeking to formulate a name,
            A citadel;
    And the winged heels are fiery with enormous speed,
        On spurning heaven; the other trampling hell;
            And thou -- recede!

    O Hermes!  Messenger of inmost thought!
        Descent!  Abide!  Swift coursing in my veins
        Shoot dazzling pains,
    The word of Selfhood integrate of Nought,
    The Ineffable Amen! the Wonder wrought.
        Bring death if life exceed!
        Bid thy pale Hermit bleed,
            Yet Life exude;
        And wisdom and the Word of Him {199B}
    Drench the mute mind grown dim
      With quietude!
    Fix thy sharp lightnings in my night!  My spirit free!
      Mix with my breath and life and name thy mood
        And self of Thee.

        [HERMES "appears:" ORPHEUS "departs."

    The magical task and the labour is ended;
      The toils are unwoven, the battle is done;
    My lover comes back to my arms, to the splendid
      Abyss of the air and abode of the sun.
    The sword be assuaged, and the bow be unbended!
      The labour is past, and the victory won.

    The arrows of song through Hell cease to hurtle.
      Away to the passionate gardens of Greece,
    Where the thrush is awake, and the voice of the turtle
      Is soft in the amorous places of peace,
    And the tamarisk groves and the olive and myrtle
      Stir ever with love and content and release.

    O bountiful bowers and O beautiful gardens!
      O isles in the azure Ionian deep!
    Ere ripens the sun, ere the spring-wind hardens
      Your fruits once again ye shall have me to keep.
    The sleep-god laments, and the love goddess pardons,
      When love at the last sinks unweary to sleep.

    The green-hearted hours shall burst into flowers.
      The winds shall waft roses from uttermost Ind.
    Our nuptial dowers shall be birds in our bowers,
      Our couches the delicate heaps of the wind.
    Where the lily-bloom showers all its light, and the powers
      Of earth in our twinning are wedded and twinned.  {200A}

    So singing I make reverence and retire;
    Not with high words of worship fairly flung
    To that sad monarch from the magic lyre,

    And half the triumphs in my heart unsung,
    Surpassing, as such triumphs must, all praise
    Of golden strings and human-fashioned tongue.

    But now I follow the uprising ways
    By secret paths indubitably drawn
    Straight from the centre of the trackless maze

    To light of earth and beauty of the dawn,
    A sure swift passage taught of wit divine
    To the wide ocean, the Achaean lawn.

    For, wit ye well, not easy is that shrine
    Of access to the mortal, as some tell,
    Not knowing: easy and exact the line

    Of light to upper air: but awful spell
    And dire demand the inward journey needs:
    That is the labour, that the work: for Hell

    Is not designed for men's aspiring deeds.
    The air is fatal, and the fear unspanned,
    Even ere the traveller fronts the Stygian meads

    And utmost edge of the detested land.
    Wherefore already doth the light appear
    Shaped in the image of a little hand

    Far up the rocky cavern: warm and clear
    The good air sends its fragrance: glory then
    To the great work accomplished even here,

    Promise and purpose unto little men
    Bound in life's limits: death indeed I sever
    By will's efficiency and speechless ken

    Of power not God's but man's.  Forget this never,
    O mortals chained in life's detested den!
    I leave this heritage to you for ever.

            O light of Apollo!
              O joy of the sky!
            We see thee, we follow,
              We draw to thee nigh.  {200B}
            We see thee unclouded,
              Whose hearts have been thinned,
            Whose souls have been shrouded,
              Whose ears are bedinned
            By hell's clamour.  How did
              The strength that has sinned
            Avail in the crowded
              Abodes of the wind?

            By lightning of rapture
              The soul of my song
            My love doth recapture;
              Lead up to the long
            Years in blithe measure
              Of summer and ease;
            Linger at leisure
              For passion and peace.
            Sadness and pleasure
              Relent and release: --
            A torrent, a treasure,
              A garden of Greece!

            Selene, our sister,
              Our lover and friend,
            Thy light hath long missed her:
              That hour hath an end.
            All aeons to squander
              We chance at our will:
            We may woo, work or wander
              Through time to our fill,
            Hither or yonder
              By fountain or hill,
            Each day growing fonder,
              Each night growing still!

            Bright Hermes behind me
              Caduceus-armed
            Guides: shall he blind me?
              My spirit be charmed?
            The song shall not swerve her,
              Its glory shall shed
            Respite, deserve her
              From gulfs of the dead.
            Ah me! let it nerve her
              These conduits to tread
            That lead to the fervour
              Of earth overhead!  {201A}

            Fire, thou dear splendour
              Of uppermost space,
            Turn to me tender
              Thine emerald face!
            Thy rubies be blended
              With diamond light!
            Thy sapphires be splendid,
              Extended to sight!
            The portals be rended
              That govern the night,
            And the guardians bended
              To magical might!

            O air of the glorious
              Garb of the globe,
            Don thy victorious
              Glittering robe!
            The sun is before us;
              The moon is above.
            Rise and adore us
              Ye dwellers thereof!
            The Muses restore us
              To Greece: as we move
            Swell the wild chorus
              Of welcome and love!

      Alas! that ever the dark place
      Should from its rocky base
    Give up no echo of the god's strong stride,
      And no one whisper steal and thrill
      My heart, dissolve the ill
    That gathers close and fears me for my bride.

      I were no worse if I were blind.
      I may not look behind
    to catch one glimpse of the dear face that follows,
      Lest I should gain forbidden lore
      And wisdom's dangerous store
    Of the black secrets of those heights and hollows.

      Alas! the way is over long,
      And weary of my song
    I sing who yearn to catch my love, and hold
      In such ten-thousandfold caress
      As shall annul distress,
    And from the iron hours bring the years of gold.  {201B}

      Alas! my soul is filled with fear,
      Is the hard conquest here?
    Where is Eurydice?  The god hath faded
      Back to invisible abodes
      And on these rocky roads
    Comes no deep perfume of her hair light-braided.

      Alas!  I listen! and no breath
      Assures the walls of death
    That life remembers, that their hate is quelled.
      My ears, my scent avail me nought;
      My slavish eyes are brought
    By the command wherewith I am compelled.

      Alas! my heart sinks momently.
      Fear steals and misery.
    From faith in faith of Hell my thoughts dissever.
      Yet, O my heart! abide, endure!
      Seek not by sight to assure,
    Or she is lost to thee and lost for ever!  {202Atop}

      Now breathes the night-air o'er the deep,
      And limb-dissolving sleep
    Laps my own country, and the maiden moon
      Gleams silver barley from the sea,
      And binds it royally
    Into a sheaf that waves to the wind's tune.

      The rocky portals rise above.
      Here I may clasp my love,
    Here Hermes shall deliver.  Ah! how shook
      Yon cliff at the wind's ardent kiss!
      This is the hour of bliss --
    The sea!  The sea!  Eurydice!  Look, Look!

      Ai! but like wind-whirled flowers of frost
      The flying form is lost!
    Cancelled and empty of Eurydice
      The black paths where she trod!
      Ai!  Ai!  My God!  My God!
    Apollo, why hast thou forsaken me?  {202Btop.  Full page follows.}


                            EXPLICIT LIBER TERTIUS


    {202}




                           LIBER QUARTUS VEL MORTIS


                                      TO

                                   MY WIFE


                              LYSANDER ("reads").

                    "The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals
                     Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."

                                   THESEUS.

                            That is an old device.
                                                "Midsummer Night's Dream."

                  What could the Muse herself that Orpheus bore
                    The Muse herself, for her enchanting son
                    Whom universal Nature did lament
                  When by the rout that made the hideous roar
                    His gory body down the stream was sent
                  Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore?
                                                                "Lycidas."

                     A brighter Hellas rears its mountains
                       From waves serener far;
                     A new Peneus rolls his fountains
                       Against the morning star.
                     Where fairer Tempes bloom, there sleep
                     Young Cyclads on a sunnier deep.
                    .     .      .      .      .      .
                         Another Orpheus sings again
                         And loves, and weeps, and dies.
                                                           "Hellas."
                    {columes resume}

                    MOUNT IDA.

            THE COMPANY OF THE MAENADS.

                     MAENADS.
        Evoe!  Evoe Ho!  Iacche!  Iacche!

        Hail, O Dionysys!  Hail!
          Winged son of Semele!
        Hail, O Hail!  The stars are pale.
        Hidden the moonlight in the vale;
          Hidden the sunlight in the sea.  {203A}

        Blessed is her happy lot
          Who beholdeth God; who moves
        Mighty-souled without a spot,
        Mingling in the godly rout
          Of the many mystic loves.

        Holy maidens, duly weave
          Dances for the mighty mother!
        Bacchanal to Bacchus cleave!
        Wave his narthex wand, and leave
          Earthy joys to earth to smother!  {203B}

        Io!  Evoe!  Sisters, mingle
          In the choir, the dance, the revel!
        He divine, the Spirit single,
        He in every vein shall tingle.
          Sense and sorrow to the devil!

        Mingle in the laughing measure,
          Hand and lip to breast and thigh!
        In enthusiastic pleasure
        Grasp the solitary treasure!
          Laughs the untiring ecstasy!

        Sisters!  Sisters!  Raise your voices
          In the inspired divine delight!
        Now the sun sets; now the choice is
        Who rebels or who rejoices,
          Murmuring to the mystic night.

        Io!  Evoe!  Circle splendid!
          Dance, ye maids serene and subtle!
        Clotho's task is fairly ended.
        Atropos, thy power is rended!
          Ho, Lachesis! ply thy shuttle!

        Weave the human dance together
          With the life of rocks and trees!
        Let the blue delirious weather
        Bind all spirits in one tether,
          Overwhelming ecstasies!

        Io Evoe!  I faint, I fall,
          Swoon in purple light; the grape
        Drowns my spirit in its thrall.
        Love me, love me over all,
          Spirit in the spirit shape!

        All is one!  I murmur.  Distant
          Sounds the shout, Evoe, Evoe!
        Evoe, Iacche!  Soft, insistent
        Like to echo's voice persistent: --
          Hail!  Agave!  Autonoe!

                      AGAVE.
    Evoe Ho!  Iacche!  Hail, O Hail!
    Praise him!  What dreams are these?

                     AUTONOE.
                          Sisters, O sisters!  {204A}

                      AGAVE.
    Say, are our brethren of the rocks awake?

                     AUTONOE.
    The lion roars.

                     MAENADS.
                         O listen to the snake!

                     AUTONOE.
    Evoe Ho!  Give me to drink!

                      AGAVE.
                                     Run wild!
    Mountain and mountain let us leap upon
    Like tigers on their prey!

                     MAENADS.
                         Crush, crush the world!

                      AGAVE.
    Tread earth as 'twere a winepress!

                     AUTONOE.
                              Drink its blood,
    The sweet red wine!

                     MAENADS.
                    Ay, drink the old earth dry!

                      AGAVE.
    Squeeze the last drops out till the frame collapse
    Like an old wineskin!

                     AUTONOE.
                           So the sooner sup
    Among the stars!

                      AGAVE.
                     The swift, swift stars!

                     MAENADS.
                                       O night!
    Night, night, fall deep and sure!  {204B}

                     AUTONOE.
                       Fall soft and sweet!

                      AGAVE.
    Moaning for love the woods lie.

                     AUTONOE.
                                  Sad the land
    Lies thirsty for our kisses.

                     MAENADS.
                                All wild things
    Yearn towards the kiss that ends in blood.

                      AGAVE.
                              Blood!  Blood!
    Bring wine!  Ha!  Bromius, Bromius!

                     MAENADS.
                           Come, sweet God,
    Come forth and lie with us!

                     AUTONOE.
                             Us, maidens now
    And then and ever afterwards!

                      AGAVE.
                               Chaste, chaste!
    Our madness hath no touch of bitterness,
    No taste of foulness in the morning mouth.

                     AUTONOE.
    O mouth of ripe red sunny grapes!  God!  God!
    Evoe!  Dwell!  Abide!

                      AGAVE.
                              I feel the wings
    Of love, of mystery; they waft soft streams
    Of night air to my heated breast and brow.

                     MAENADS.
    He comes!  He comes!  {s205A}

                      AGAVE.
                    Silence, O girls, and peace!
    The God's most holy presence asks the hymn
    The solemn hymn, the hymn of agony,
    Lest in the air of glory that surrounds
    The child of Semele we lose the earth
    And corporal presence of the Zeus-begot.

                     AUTONOE.
    Yea, sisters, raise the chant of riot!  Lift
    Your wine-sweet voices, move your wine-stained limbs
    In joyful invocation!

                     MAENADS.
                          Ay, we sing.

        Hail, child of Semele!
        To her as unto thee
    Be reverence, be deity, be immortality!

        Shame! treachery of the spouse
        Of the Olympian house,
    Hera! thy grim device against the sweet carouse!

        Lo! in red roar and flame
        Did Zeus descend!  What claim
    To feel the immortal fire had then the Theban dame!

        Caught in that fiery wave
        Her love and life she gave
    With one last kissing cry the unborn child to save.

        And thou, O Zeus, the sire
        Of Bromius -- hunger dire! --
    Didst snatch the unborn babe from that Olympian fire:

        In thine own thigh most holy
        That offspring melancholy
    Didst hide, didst feed, on light, ambrosia, and moly.  {205B}

        Ay! and with serpent hair
        And limbs divinely fair
    Didst thou, Dionysus, leap forth to the nectar air!

        Ay! thus the dreams of fate
        We dare commemorate,
    Twining in lovesome curls the spoil of mate and mate.

        O Dionysus, hear!
        Be close, be quick, be near,
    Whispering enchanted words in every curving ear!

        O Dionysys, start
        As the Apollonian dart!
    Bury thy horned head in every bleeding heart!

                      AGAVE.
              He is here!  He is here!

                     AUTONOE.
              Tigers, appear!

                      AGAVE.
              To the clap of my hand
              And the whish of my wand,
              Obey!

                     AUTONOE.
                      I have found
              A chariot crowned
              With ivy and vine,
              And the laurel divine,
              And the clustering smell
              Of the sage asphodel,
              And the Daedal flower
              Of the Cretan bower;
              Dittany's force,
              And larkspur's love,
              And blossoms of gorse
              Around and above.

                      AGAVE.
              The tiger and panther
              Are here at my cry.
              Ho, girls!  Span there
              Their sides!  {206A}

                     MAENADS.
                         Here am I!
              And I!  We are ready.

                      AGAVE.
              Strong now and steady!

                   FIRST MAENAD.
              The tiger is harnessed.

                  SECOND MAENAD.
              The nightingale urges
              Our toil from her far nest.

                   THIRD MAENAD.
              Ionian surges
              Roar back to our chant.

                  FOURTH MAENAD.
              Aha! for the taunt
              Of Theban sages
              Is lost, lost, lost!
              The wine that enrages
              Our life is enforced.
              We dare them and daunt.

                      AGAVE.
              The spirits that haunt
              The rocks and the river,
              The moors and the woods,
              The fields and the floods,
              Are with us for ever!

                     MAENADS.
              Are of us for ever.
              Evoe!  Evoe

                     AUTONOE.
              Agave! He cometh!

                      AGAVE.
              Cry ho! Autonoe!

                      ALL.
    Ho!  Ho!  Evoe Ho!  Iacche!  Evoe!  Evoe!
              The white air hummeth
              With force of the spirit.
              We are heirs: we inherit.
              Our joys are as theirs;
              Weave with you prayers
              The joys of a kiss!
              Ho! for the bliss
              Of the cup and the rod.
                He cometh!  O lover!
              O friend and O God,
                Cover us, cover
                Our faces, and hover
              Above us, within us!
                Daintily shod,
                Daintily robed,
              His witcheries spin us
              A web of desire.
              Subtle as fire
              He cometh among us.
                The whole sky globed
                  Is on fire with delight,
              Delight that hath stung us,
                The passion of night.
              Night be our mistress!
              That trees and this tress
              Weave with thy wind
              Into curls deep-vined!
                Passionate bliss!
              Rapture on rapture!
              Our hymns recapture
                The Bromian kiss.
              Blessed our souls!
                Blessed this even!
              We reach to the goals
                Of the starriest heaven.
    Daphnis, and Atthis, and Chrysis, and Chloe,
    Mingle, O maidens!  Evoe!  Evoe!

                    DIONYSYS.
        I bring ye wine from above,
          From the vats of the storied sun;
        For every one of ye love,
          And life for every one.
        Ye shall dance on hill and level;
          Ye shall sing in hollow and height
        In the festal mystical revel,
          The rapturous Bacchanal rite!  {207A}
        The rocks and trees are yours,
          And the waters under the hill,
        By the might of that which endures,
          The holy heaven of will!
        I kindle a flame like a torrent
          To rush from star to star;
        Your hair as a comet's horrent,
          Ye shall see things as they are!
        I lift the mask of matter;
          I open the heart of man;
        For I am of force to shatter
          The cast that hideth -- Pan!
        Your loves shall lap up slaughter,
          And dabled with roses of blood
        Each desperate darling daughter
          Shall swim in the fervid flood.
        I bring ye laughter and tears,
          The kisses that foam and bleed,
        The joys of a million years,
          The flowers that bear no seed.
        My life is bitter and sterile,
          Its flame is a wandering star.
        Ye shall pass in pleasure and peril
          Across the mystical bar
        That is set for wrath and weeping
          Against the children of earth;
        But ye in singing and sleeping
          Shall pass in measure and mirth!
        I lift my wand and wave you
          Through hill to hill of delight:
        My rosy rivers lave you
          In innermost lustral light
        I lead you, lord of the maze,
          In the darkness free of the sun;
        In spite of the spite that is day's
          We are wed, we are wild, we are one!

                   FIRST MAENAD.
    O sweet soul of the waters!  Chase me not!
    What would'st thou!

          A VOICE AS OF RUNNING BROOKS.
                      Love!

                   FIRST MAENAD.
                  Love, love, I give, I give.
    I yield, I pant, I fall upon thy breast, {207B}
    O sacred soul of water.  Kiss, ah kiss,
    With gentle waves like lips my breast, my two small breasts,
    Rose flames on ivory seas!

                  SECOND MAENAD.
                          Nay!  Nay!  O soul
    Of ivy, clingst thou so for love?

        A VOICE AS OF THE RUSTLING OF IVY.
                                  For love.

                  SECOND MAENAD.
    Cling not so close!  O no! cling closer then!
    Let thy green coolness twine about my limbs
    And still the raving blood: or closer yet,
    And link about my neck, and kill me so!

                   THIRD MAENAD.
    Soul of the rock!  Dost love me?

           A VOICE AS OF FALLING ROCK.
                         I love thee.

                   THIRD MAENAD.
                               Woo me then!
    Let all the sharp hard spikes of crystal dart,
    Press hard upon my body!  O, I fall,
    Fall from thy crags, still clinging, clinging so,
    Into the dark.  Oblivion!

                 A DISTANT VOICE.
                             Io Evoe!
                            [ORPHEUS "enters."

                 CROWD OF MAENADS.
    Evoe!  Evoe!  It is a lion!

                  FOURTH MAENAD.
                              Lion,
    O lion, dost thou love?

                   FIFTH MAENAD.
                               Thee I love,
    O tawny king of these deep glades!  {208A}

                   SIXTH MAENAD.
                                What wood
    Were worthy for thy dwelling?

                     CHORUS.
                         Come, come, come,
    O lion, and revel in our band!

                     ORPHEUS.
                                  Alas!
    I sorrow, seeing ye rejoice.

                   FIRST MAENAD.
                              O lion!
    That is not kind.

                     ORPHEUS.
                   Too kind.  Since all is sorrow,
    Sorrow implicit in the purest joy,
    Sorrow the cause of sorrow; evil still
    Fertile, and sterile love and righteousness.
    Eurydice, Eurydice!

                  SECOND MAENAD.
                           Drink wine!

                     ORPHEUS.
    Ay, mask the grisly head of things that are
    By drowning sense.  Such horror as is hid
    In life no man dare look upon.  Woe!  Woe!

                      AGAVE.
    Call then reproach upon these maiden rites!

                     ORPHEUS.
    Nay! virtue is the devil's name for vice,
    And all your righteousness is filthy rags
    Wherein ye strut, and hide the one base thought.
    To mask the truth, to worship, to forget;
    These three are one.

                      AGAVE.
                    What art thou then? a man?  {208B}

                     ORPHEUS.
    No more.

                      AGAVE.
                   No longer?

                     ORPHEUS.
                         Nothing.

                      AGAVE.
                               What then here
    Dost thou amid these sacred woods?

                     ORPHEUS.
                                     I weep.

                      AGAVE.
    Weep then red wine!

                     AUTONOE.
                     Or we will draw thy tears,
    Red tears of blood.

                      AGAVE.
                       On girls! this bitter fool
    Would stop our revel!

                     ORPHEUS.
                        Nay! ye bid me cease
    Weeping.

                      AGAVE.
         Then listen! drink this deep full cup,
    Or here we tear thee limb from limb!

                     ORPHEUS.
                                       Do so!
    Ay, me!  I am Orpheus, poor lost fool of Fate!
    Orpheus, can charm the wildest to my lyre.
    Beasts, rocks, obey -- ah, Hades, didst thou mock,
    Alone of all, my songs?  Thee I praise not.
                       [AUTONOE "embraces him."
    Audacious woman!

                      AGAVE.
                        Tear the fool in shreds!
    Then to the dance!  {209A}

                   ORPHEUS.<<Much of the following invocation is a free rendering of several fine passages in the Egyptian Book of the Dead.>>
                        The old Egyptian spell!
    Stir, then, poor children, if ye can!  Ah me!
                                            "Sings."
        Unity uttermost showed,
          I adore the might of thy breath,
        Supreme and terrible God
          Who makest the Gods and death
              To tremble before thee: --
              I, I adore thee!

        O Hawk of gold with power enwalled,
        Whose face is like an emerald;
        Whose crown is indigo as night;
          Smaragdine snakes about thy brow
        Twine, and the disc of flaming light
          Is on thee, seated in the prow
        Of the Sun's bark, enthroned above
        With lapis-lazuli for love
          And ruby for enormous force
        Chosen to seat thee, thee girt round
        With leopard's pell, and golden sound
          Of planets choral in their course!
        O thou self-formulated sire!
        Self-master of thy dam's desire!
        Thine eyes blaze forth with fiery light'
          Thine heart a secret sun of flame!
        I adore the insuperable might:
          I bow before the unspoken Name.

        For I am Yesterday, and I
          To-day, and I to-morrow, born
        Now and again, on high, on high
          Travelling on Dian's naked horn!
        I am the Soul that doth create
          The Gods, and all the Kin of Breath.
        I come from the sequestered state;
          My birth is from the House of Death.

        Hail! ye twin hawks high pinnacled
          That watch upon the universe!
        Ye that the bier of God beheld!
          That bore it onwards, ministers
        Of peace within the House of Wrath,  {209B}
        Servants of him that cometh forth
        At dawn with many-coloured lights
          Mounting from underneath the North,
        The shrine of the celestial Heights!

        He is in me, and I in Him!
          Mine is the crystal radiance
        That filleth aether to the brim
          Wherein all stars and suns may dance.
        I am the beautiful and glad,
          Rejoicing in the golden day.
        I am the spirit silken-clad
          That fareth on the fiery way.
        I have escaped from Him, whose eyes
        Are close at eventide, and wise
        To drag thee to the House of Wrong: --
        I am armed!  I am armed!  I am strong!  I am strong!
        I make my way: opposing horns
          Of secret foemen push their lust
        In vain: my song their fury scorns;
          They sink, they grovel in the dust.

        Hail, self-created Lord of Night!
        Inscrutable and infinite!
          Let Orpheus journey forth to see
          The Disk in peace and victory!
        Let him adore the splendid sight,
          The radiance of the Heaven of Nu;
        Soar like a bird, laved by the light,
          To pierce the far eternal blue!

        Hail!  Hermes! thou the wands of ill
          Hast touched with strength, and they are shivered!
        The way is open unto will!
          The pregnant Goddess is delivered!

        Happy, yea, happy! happy is he
          That hath looked forth upon the Bier
            That goeth to the House of Rest!
        His heart is lit with melody;
          Peace in his house is master of fear;
            His holy Name is in the West
        When the sun sinks, and royal rays
        Of moonrise flash across the day's!  {210A}

    I have risen!  I have risen! as a mighty hawk of gold!
    From the golden egg I gather, and my wings the world enfold.
    I alight in mighty splendour from the throned boats of light;
    Companies of Spirits follow me; adore the Lords of Night.
    Yea, with gladness did they paean, bowing low before my car,
    In my ears their homage echoed from the sunrise to the star.
    I have risen!  I am gathered as a lovely hawk of gold,
    I the first-born of the Mother in her ecstasy of old.
    Lo!  I come to face the dweller in the sacred snake of Khem;
    Come to face the Babe and Lion, come to measure force with them!
    Ah! these locks flow down, a river, as the earth's before the Sun,
    As the earth's before the sunset, and the God and I are One.
    I who entered in a Fool, gain the God by clean endeavour;
    I am shaped as men and women, fair for ever and for ever.

       ("The" MAENADS "stand silent and quiet.")

                   ORPHEUS.<<The following is paraphrased from one of the writings (falsely) attributed to Orpheus.>>
    Worship with due rite, orderly attire,
    The makers of the world, the floating souls
    Whence fell these crystals we call earth.  Praise Might
    The Limitless; praise Pallas, by whose Wisdom
    The One became divided.  Praise ye Him,
    Chronos, from whom, the third, is form perceived.
    Praise ye Poseidon, his productive power,
    And Juno, secret nature of all things,
    On which all things are builded: praise ye Love, {210B}
    Idalian Aphrodite, strong as fair,
    Strong not to loosen Godhead's crown by deed
    To blind eyes not a God's: and praise pure Life,
    Apollo in his splendour, whom I praise
    Most, being his, and this song his, and his
    All my desire and all my life, and all
    My love, albeit he hath forsaken me.
    These are One God in many: praise ye Him!

                      AGAVE.
    We praise indeed who made the choral world
    And stars the greatest, and all these the least
    Flowers at our feet: but also we may praise
    This Dionysus, lord of life and joy,
    In whom we may perceive a subtle world
    Hidden behind this masquerade of things.
    O sisters, hither, thither!

                     ORPHEUS.
                             All deceit.
    Delusive as this world of shadows is,
    That subtler world is more delusive yet,
    Involving deeper and still deeper: thought,
    Desire of life, in that warm atmosphere
    Spring up and blossom new, rank poisonous flowers,
    The enemies of peace.  Nay! matter's all,
    And all is sorrow.  Therefore not to be,
    Not to think, love, know, contemplate, exist;
    This Not is the one hope.

                      AGAVE.
                             Believe it not!
    Here is true joy -- the woodland revellings,
    The smile, the kiss, the laughter leaping up,
    And music inward, musings multiform,
    Manifold, multitudinous, involved
    Each in the deep bliss of the other's love; --
    Ay me! my sisters.  Thither!

                     AUTONOE.
                             Wake the dance!  {211A}

                     MAENADS.
    Pour luscious wine, cool, sweet, strong wine!  Bring life,
    Life overflowing from the cup!

                     ORPHEUS.
                               Hush!  Hush!
    I hymn the eternal matter, absolute,
    Divided, chaos, formless frame of force,
    Wheels of the luminous reach of space that men
    Know by the name of Pan.

                     MAENADS.
                                Hail!  Hail!
    Pan!  Son of Hermes!  God of Arcady
    And all wild woodlands!

                     ORPHEUS.
                        Neither Son, nor Sire,
    Nor God: but he is all: all else in him
    Is hidden: he the secret and the self
    Shrined central in this orb of eyeless Fate,
    Phantom, elusive, permanent.  In all,
    In spirit and in matter immanent,
    He also is the all, and all is ill.
    Three forms and functions hath the soul; the sea
    Murmurs their names repeating: "Maris" call
    The soul as it engendereth things below;
    "Neptune" the soul that contemplateth things
    Above; and "Ocean" as itself retracts
    Itself into itself: choose ye of these!<<1>>
    But I hymn Pan.  Awake, O lyre, awake!
    As if it were for the last time, awake!
                                       ["He sings."

<<1. Again from pseudo-Orpheus.>>

    In the spring, in the loud lost places.
      In the groves of Arcadian green,
    There are sounds and shadowy faces
      And strange things dimly seen.
    Though the face of the springtide as grace is,
      The sown and the woodland demesne
    Have a soul caught up in their spaces,
      Unkenned, and unclean!  {211B}

    It takes up the cry of the wind.
    Its eyes with weeping are blind.
    A strong hate whirls it behind
        As it flees for ever.
    Mad, with the tokens of Fear;
    Branded, and sad, without cheer;
    Year after ghastly year,
        And it endeth never.

    And this is the mystical stranger,
      The subtle Arcadian God
    That lurks as for sorrow and danger,
      Yet rules all the earth with his rod.
    Abiding in spirit and sense
      Through the manifold changes of man,
    This soul is alone and intense
      And one -- He is Pan.

    More subtle than mass as ye deem it
      He abides in the strife that is dust.
    Than spirit more keen as ye dream it,
      He is laughter and loathing and lust.
    He is all.  Nature's agonies scream it;
      Her joys quire it clear; in the must
    Of the vat is His shape in the steam.  It
      Is Fear, and Disgust.

    For the spirit of all that is,
    The light in the lover's kiss,
    The shame and sorrow and bliss;
        They are all in Pan;
    The inmost wheel of the wheels,
    The feeling of all that feels,
    The God and the knee that kneels,
        And the foolish man.

    For Pan is the world above
      And the world that is hidden beneath;
    He grins from the mask of love;
      His sword has a jewelled sheath.
    What boots it a maiden to gird her?
      Her rape ere the aeons began
    Was sure; in one roar of red murder
      She breaks: He is Pan.

    He is strong to achieve, to forsake her;
      He is death as it clings to desire,
    Ah, woe to the Earth!  If he wake her,
      Air, water and spirit and fire {212A}
    Rush in to uproot her and break her: --
      Yet he is the broken; the pyre,
    And the flame and the victim; the maker,
      And master and sire!

    And all that is, is force.
    A fatal and witless course
    It follows without remorse
         With never an aim.
    Caught in the net we strive;
    We ruin, and think we thrive;
    And we die -- and remain alive: --
        And Pan is our name!

    For the misery catches and winds us
      Deep, deep in the endless coil;
    Ourself is the cord that binds us,
      And ours is the selfsame toil.
    We are; we are not; yet our date is
      An age, though each life be a span;
    And ourself and our state and our fate is
      The Spirit of Pan.

    O wild is the maiden that dances
      In the dim waned light of the moon!
    Black stars are her myriad glances:
      Blue night is the infinite swoon!
    But in other array advances
      The car of the holier tune;
    And our one one chance is in mystical trances; --
      Thessalian boon!

    For swift as the wheels may turn,
    And fierce as the flames may burn,
    The spirit of man may discern
        In the wheel of Will
    A drag on the wheels of Fate,
    A water the fires to abate,
    A soul the soul to make straight.
        And bid "be still!"

    But ye, ye invoke in your city
      And call on his name on the hill
    The God who is born without pity,
      The horrible heart that is chill;  {212B}
    The secret corruption of ages
      Ye cling to, and hold as ye can,
    And abandon the songs of the sages
      For Passion -- and Pan!

    O thou heart of hate and inmost terror!
      O thou soul of subtle fear and lust!
    Loathsome shape of infamy, thy mirror
      Shown as spirit or displayed as dust!
    O thou worm in every soul of matter
      Crawling, feasting, rotting; slime of hell!
    Beat and batter! shear and shatter!
      Break the egg that hides thee well!
    Pan!  I call thee!  Pan!  I see thee in thy whirling citadel.

    I alone of all men may unveil thee,
      Show the ghastly soul of all that is
    Unto them, that they themselves may hail thee,
      Festering corruption of thy kiss!
    Thou the soul of God! the soul of demon!
      Soul of matter, soul of man!
    Show the gross fools, thine, that think them freemen,
      What thou art, and what thy heart,
    And what they are, that they are thee,
      All creation, whole and part,
    Thine and thee, near and far: --
      Come!  I call thee, I who can.
    Pan!  I know thee!  Pan!  I show thee!
        Burst thy coffin open, Pan!

    What have I said?  What have I done?

                     MAENADS.
                                  Pan!  Pan!
    Evoe, Iacche!  Pan!

                      AGAVE.
                          The victim!

                     AUTONOE.
                                       Rend
    The sole pure thing in this impure gross lump,
    The shapeless, formless horror that is us
    And God -- Ah! rend him limb from limb!  {213A}

                     ORPHEUS.
                                  Apollo!
    This is the night.  This is the end of all.
    No force detains.  No power urges on.
    I am free!  Alas! alas! -- Eurydice!
               ("He is torn to pieces.  A faint voice -- like his -- is still
                   heard, ever receding and failing.")

    O night!
    Fade, love!  Fade, light!
    I pass beyond Life's law.
    I melt as snow; as ice I thaw;
    As mist I dissipate: I am borne, I draw
    Through chasms in the mountains: stormy gusts
    Of ancient sorrows and forgotten lusts
    Bear me along: they touch me not: I waste
    The memory of long lives interlaced
    Fades in my fading.  I disintegrate,
    Fall into black oblivion of Fate.
    My being divides: I have forgot my name.
    I am blown out as a thin subtle flame.
    I am no more.

                    A SPIRIT.
                    What is? what chorus swells
    Through these dark gorges and untrodden dells!
    What whisper through the forest?  Far entwines
    The low song with the roses and the vines,
    The high song with the mountains and the pines,
    The inmost song with secret fibre of light,
    And in the boiling pools and quorns and chasms
    Chases the stryges, Death's devote phantasms,
    Into a brilliant air wherein they are lost.
    Deep in the river moans the choral roar,
    Till the deep murmur of the Lesbian shore
    Washed of the luminous sea gives answer, while
    The angry wail of Nature doth beguile
    The hours, the wrath of Nature reft of one,
    The sole strong spirit that was Nature's sun,
    The orb she circled round, the one thing clean
    From all her gross machinery, obscene {213B}
    And helpless: -- and the lonely mother-cry,
    The Muse, her hope down-stricken.  Magically
    The full deep chorus stirs the sky;
    Hark! one voice beyond all
    Gives love's own call,
    Not hers, Eurydice's,
    But thine, thou sweet blood-breasted nightingale
    Waking thy choral wail
    From Mitylene to remotest seas!

                THE RIVER HEBRUS.
              Was e'er a stream before
              So sad a burden bore
    Rolling a melancholy sorrow down from shore to shore?

                    CALLIOPE.
              O this is bitterness beyond belief.
              Grief beyond grief.
              Boots it to weep?  I holp him not with force:
              What should avail -- remorse?

                  RIVER HEBRUS.
              Hear upon high the melancholy
              Antistrophe
              Matching the strophe's agony!
              Tides on a terrible sea!

                    CALLIOPE.
              Bear, bear the laurelled head
              Of him I loved, him dead,
    O Hebrus, ever downward on thy bosom iron-red!

                  RIVER HEBRUS.
              All Nature's tunes are dull.
              The beautiful,
              The harmony of life is null.

                    CALLIOPE.
              What unto us remains
              But in these broken strains
    To hymn with voices jarred the jarred world's shriek of woe?

              O!  O!  {214A}

                  RIVER HEBRUS.
              This discord is an agony
              Shuddering harsh in me;
    My waters will empoison the fair fresh-water sea!

                    CALLIOPE.
              Nay! all is ended now.
              Cover the beaten brow!
              Carry the brain of music into the wide AEgean!
              No priest pronounce thy paean
              Ever again, Apollo,
              Thou false, thou fair, thou hollow!
              Die to a groan within a shrine!
              Despair thy force divine!
              Thou didst achieve this ruin; let the seas
              Roar o'er thy lost name of Musagetes!

                THE LESBIAN SHORE.
              Welcome, O holy head!
              Welcome, O force not dead!
              Reverberating joy of music subtly shed!
              Welcome, O glorious, O laurelled one!
              Own offspring of the Sun,
              The ancient harmony was hardly yet begun.
              By thee and by thy life
              Arose the Lesbian maiden.
              Thou art perished as thy wife;
    My shores with magic loves and songs of life are laden.

                    CALLIOPE.
              Weep, weep no more!
              O loyal Lesbian shore,
    I hear a murmur sound more sweet than murmur ever bore.
              Not ocean's siren spell
              Soft-sounded in a spiral shell
    Were quite so exquisite, were all so admirable!

                  LESBIAN SHORE.
              Nay! but the agony of the time
              Rings in the royal rime!
    She hath touched the intimate, and chanced on the sublime.  {214B}

                    CALLIOPE.
              Ay!  Ay! a woman's silky tone
              Makes music for eternity her own,
    Till all men's victories in song seem a discordant groan.

                  LESBIAN SHORE.
              Upon my cliffs of green,
              Beneath the azure skies,
              She stands with looks of fire,
              Sappho.  Her hands between
              Lies the wild world; she flies
              From agony to agony of desire.

                    CALLIOPE.
              Him, Orpheus, him she sings;
              Loosing the living strings,
    Till music fledged fares forth sunward on moon-wrought wings.

                  LESBIAN SHORE.
              Yea, by the solar name,
              Orpheus her lips acclaim,
    The centre and the silence!  O! the torrent of fine flame
              Like hair that shooteth forth
              To the ensanguine North
    Whence ran the drunken crew, Bassarids in their wrath.

                     SAPPHO.
    Woe is me! the brow of a brazen morning
    Breaks in blood on water athirst of Hebrus.
    Sanguine horror starts on her hills tenebrous:
              Hell hath not heard her!

    Dumb and still thy birds, O Apollo, scorning
    Song; yells drown them, lecherous anthems gabbled,
    Laughter splashed of Bassarids, blood-be-dabbled,
              Mad with their murder!

    O thou many-coloured immortal maiden,
    Dawn!  O dew, delight of a world!  A sorrow
    Hides your holy faces awhile.  To-morrow
              Comes for your calling?  {215A}

    Still the notes of musical Orpheus, laden
    Never now of pain or of failing, follow;
    Follow up the height, or adown the hollow
              Fairy are falling.

    O my hopeless misery mind of longing!
    O the anguish born in a breast unlovered!
    Women, wail the face of a God uncovered,
              Brain dead and breath dumb!

    Wail the sense of infinite ardours thronging
    Fast and fast and faster athwart the heaven,
    Keen as light and cruel as fire, as levin
              Swift and as death dumb!

    Freedom, rapture, victory, fill the chorus,
    Dying, ever dying, among the billows;
    Whispered, ever whispered among the willows: --
              Pour the libation!

    Now springs up a notable age.  Adore us
    Masters now of music above his magic,
    Lords of change, leaps pastoral up to tragic,
              Thanks to the Thracian!

    Ah, my pain! what desolate female bosoms,
    Smitten hearts of delicate males, uncover;
    Grip not life for poet or sage or lover,
              Feed on derision.

    Yea, in these mature me avenger blossoms
    Swift as swords to sever the subtle ether,
    Lift the earth, see infinite space beneath her,
              Swoon at the vision.

    This, O Orpheus, this be a golden guerdon
    Unto thee for gift of amaze and wonder!
    This thy sorrow, sword of a heart asunder,
              Beareth a flower.

    This the heart of woman -- a bitter burden! --
    Thou has filled with seed -- O a seed of madness!
    Seed of music! seed of a royal sadness! --
              This be our dower!  {215B}

    Ah! the bitter legacy left of lyre-light!
    Thou wast Nature's prophet, a wise magician;
    Magic fails, and love is a false physician: --
              Deep our disease is!

    Now to us the crouching over the firelight,
    Eating out for hunger of love our vitals!
    (Eaten out the hollower for respitals
              Swift as the breeze is.)

    Ay! the golden age is a broken vessel.
    All the golden waters exhale, evanish.
    Joy of life and laughter of love we banish:
              Damned is the will dead.

    Now with brass and iron we writhe and wrestle.
    Now with clay the torrent of fire is tainted.
    Life apes death: the lily is curled and painted;
              Gold is regilded.

    Master, we lament thee, as awful anguish
    Seizes on the infinite maze of mortals.
    See we love that yearns to the golden portals
              Bound of the grey god.

    Love, thy children, laughter and sunlight, languish.
    Aphrodite, miracle of the flashed foam,
    Burns with beaten agony in the lashed foam;
              Down is the day-god.

    Ay! this first of Lesbian lamentations
    Still shall burn from aeon to idle aeon!
    (Chorus, epithany, ode, and paean
              Dumb or dishevelled!)

    Still my songs shall murmur across the nations,
    Gain their meed of misery, praise, and yearning,
    Smite their stroke on centuries foully burning,
              Drunk or bedevilled.

    Song?  No beauty shine in a sphere of music!
    Me? my voice be dull, be a void, be toneless!
    Match me, sea! than me thou hast many a moan less,
              Many a million!  {216A}

    Sun, be broken!  Moon, be eclipsed; be dew sick!
    Ocean flat and poisonous, earth demented!
    Living souls go shuddering through the tented
              Air, his pavilion!

    Ay; the pectis clangs me a soulless discord: --
    Let me break my visible heart a-weeping!
    Loving?  Drinking?  Misery.  Singing, sleeping
              Touch not my sorrow.

    Orpheus, turn the sorrow-chord to the bliss-chord!
    All may rise the easier that the one set.
    So our eyes from saddening at the sunset
              Turn to to-morrow.

                    CALLIOPE.
              Silence.  I hear a voice
              That biddeth me rejoice.
              I know the whole wise plan
              Of fate regarding Man.

                THE LESBIAN SHORE.
      It is the sun's dark bride
      Nuith, the azure-eyed.
      No longer Sappho sings her spell;
      His heart divorced, her heart insatiable.
      There is deep silence.  Earth hath passed
      To a new kingdom.  In a purpose vast
      Her horoscope is cast.

                      NUITH.
      Enough.  it is ended, the story
        Of magical aeons of song;
      The sun is gone down in his glory
        To the Houses of Hate and of Wrong.
          Would ye see if he rise?
          In Hesperian skies
        Ye may look for his rising for long.

      The magical aeon beginneth
        Of song in the heart of desire,
      That smiteth and striveth and sinneth,
        But burns up the soul of the lyre: --
          There is pain in the note: --
          In the sorcerer's throat
        Is a sword, and his brain is afire!  {216B}

      Long after (to men: but a moment
        To me in my mansion of rest)
      Is a sundawn to blaze what the glow meant
        Seen long after death in the west;
          A magical aeon!
          Nor love-song nor paean,
        But a flame with a silvery crest.

      There shall rise a sweet song of the soul
        Far deeper than love or distress;
      Beyond mortals and gods shall it roll;
        It shall find me, and crave, and caress.
          Ah! me it shall capture
          In torrents of rapture;
        It shall flood me, and fill, and possess.

      For brighter from age unto age
        The weary old world shall renew
      Its life at the lips of the sage,
        Its love at the lips of the dew.
          With kisses and tears
          The return of the years
        Is sure as the starlight is true.

      Yet the drift of the stars is to beauty,
        To strength, and to infinite pleasure.
      The toil and the worship and duty
        Shall turn them to laughter and leisure.
          Were the world understood
          Ye would see it was good,
        A dance to a delicate measure.

      Ye fools, interweaving in passion.
        The lyrical light of the mind!
      Go on, in your drivelling fashion!
        Ye shall surely seek long and not find.
          From without ye may see
          All the beauty of me,
        And my lips, that their kisses are kind.

      For Eurydice once I lamented;
        For Orpheus I do not lament:
      Her days were a span, and demented;
        His days are for aye, and content.
          Mere love is as nought
          To the love that is Thought,
        And idea is more than event.  {217A}

      O lovers!  O poets!  O masters
        Of me, ye may ravish my frown!
      Aloof from my shocks and disasters!
        Impatient to kiss me, and crown!
          I am eager to yield.
          In the warrior field
        Ye shall fight me, and fasten me down.

      O poets!  O masters!  O lovers!
        Sweet souls of the strength of the sun!
      The couch of eternity covers
        Our loves, and our dreams are as done.
          Reality closes
          Our life into roses;
        We are infinite space: we are one.

      There is one<<1>> that hath sought me and found me
        In the heart of the sand and the snow:
      He hath caught me, and held me, and bound me,
        In the lands where no flower may grow.
          His voice is a spell,
          Hath enchanted me well!
        I am his, did I will it or no.

<<1. Possibly intended as a reference to the poet himself.>>

      But I will it, I will it, I will it!
        His speck of a soul in its cars
      Shall lift up immensity! fill it
        With light of his lyrical bars.
          His soul shall concentre
          All space; he shall enter
        The beautiful land of the stars.

      He shall know me eternally wedded
        To the splendid and subtle of mind;
      For the pious, the arrogant-headed,
        He shall know they nor seek me nor find.
          O afloat in me curled!
          Cry aloud to the world
        That I and my kisses are kind!

      O lover!  O poet!  O maiden
        To me in my magical way!
      Be thy songs with the wilderness laden!
        Thy lure be adrift and astray: --
          So to me thou shalt cling!
          So to me thou shalt sing
        Of the beautiful law of the day!  {217B}

      I forbid thee to weep or to worship;
        I forbid thee to sing or to write!
      The Star-Goddess guideth us her ship;
        The sails belly out with the light.
          Beautiful head!
          We will sing on our bed
        Of the beautiful law of the Night!  {218Atop}

      We are lulled by the whirr of the stars;
        We are fanned by the whisper, the wind;
      We are locked in the unbreakable bars,
        The love of the spirit and mind.
          The infinite powers
          Of rapture are ours;
        We are one, and our kisses are kind.  {218Btop full page below}



                            EXPLICIT LIBER QUARTUS



{218}




                           EPILOGUE AND DEDICATION


                                                          "November 19, 1906."
MY DEAR ION, -- I address you by the unfamiliar title in giving you, a man self-damned, God knows how unjustly, as the author of the phrase, "I am not an appreciator of poetry, and I have no Keats," these volumes.  For the matter thereof is already in great part yours and as such cannot be given.  The rest I offer because it is hardly possible to close definitely, as I do now, a period of many years' work, without reflecting upon that period as a whole.  And, when I do so, I find you at the beginning like Ladas or Pheidippides of old, running -- ready to run until you achieve the goal or your heart burst; but you are among a crowd.  I join you.  Eight years ago this day you, Hermes, let me blindfold to awake a chosen runner of the course.  "In all my wanderings in darkness your light shone before me though I knew it not."  To-day (one may almost hope, turning into the straight) you and I are alone.  Terrible and joyous!  We shall find companions at the End, at the banquet, lissome and cool and garlanded; companions with a Silver Star or maybe a Jewelled Eye mobile and uncertain -- as if alive -- on their foreheads.  We shall be bidden to sit, and they will wreathe us with immortal flowers, and give us to drink of the seemly wine of Iacchus -- well! but until then, unless my heart deceives me, no third shall appear to join us.  Indeed, may two attain?  It seems a thing impossible in nature.  May it not be that -- near as the resounding roar of the viewless spectators sounds to our dust-dimmed ears -- there stands some awful opposer in the way, some fear or some seduction?  Why do you grip that bar in your left hand?  Does not this loin-cloth irk my limbs?  We should have shave our heads before the race -- the curls are moist and heavy!  Why did we cumber ourselves with sandals?  Long ere now our feet would have grown hard.  Well, if my heart bursts, it bursts; you must give these volumes to the young athletes, that they may learn wherefore I failed -- wherefore it was given unto me to run thus far.  For, if I have put nothing else therein, most surely that is there.
                                                        ALEISTER CROWLEY.


                          EPILOGUE AND DEDICATION OF

                            VOLUMES I., II., III.

{columns resume}

                     ELEUSIS.

THOSE who are most familiar with the spirit of fair play which pervades our great public schools will have no difficulty, should they {219A} observe, in an obscure corner, the savage attack of Jones minor upon Robinson minimus, in deducing that the former has only just got over the "jolly good hiding" that Smith major had so long promised him, the {219B} determining factor of the same being Smith's defeat by Brown maximus behind the chapel, after Brown's interview with the Head-Master.
   We are most of us aware that cabinet ministers, bishops, and dons resemble each other in the important particular that all are still schoolboys, and their differences but the superficial one produced by greasing, soaping, and withering them respectively; so that it will meet with instant general approval if I open this paper by the remark that Christianity, as long as it flourished, was content to assimilate Paganism, never attacking it until its own life had been sapped by the insidious heresies of Pall.
   Time passed by, and they bullied Manes and Cerinthus; history repeated itself until it almost knew itself by heart; finally, at the present day, some hireling parasites of the decaying faith -- at once the origin and the product of that decay -- endeavour to take advantage of the "Greek movement" or the "Neo-pagan revival" in the vain hope of diverting the public attention from the phalanx of Rationalism -- traitorously admitted by Luther, and now sitting crowned and inexpugnable in the very citadel of the faith -- to their own dishonest lie that Paganism was a faith whose motto was "Carpe diem,"<<"Gather ye roses!" is the masterpiece of a Christian clergyman. -- A.C.>> and those methods were drink, Dance, and Studio Murder.<<A perculiarly gross case of psychopathic crime which occurred in 1906.>>  Why is Procopius cleaner than Petronius?  Even a Julian could confute this sort of thing; but are we to rest for ever in negation?  No; a Robinson minimus ipse will turn, and it is quite time that science was given a chance to measure itself against bulk.  I shall not be content with giving Christian apologists the lie direct, but proceed to convict them of the very materialism against which they froth.  In a word, {220A} to-day Christianity is the irreligion of the materialist, or if your like, the sensualist; while in Paganism, we may find the expression of that ever-haunting love -- nay, necessity! -- of the Beyond which tortures and beautifies those of us who are poets.
    GR:pi-alpha-nu-tau-alpha kappa-alpha-theta-alpha-rho-alpha tau-omicron-iota-sigma kappa-alpha-theta-alpha-rho-omicron-iota-sigma -- and, while there is no logical break between the apparently chaste dogma of the Virgin Birth and the horrible grossness of R. P. Sanchez in his "De Matrimonio," Lib. ii. Cap. xxi., "Utium Virgo Maria semen emiserit in copulatione cum Spiritu Sancto," so long as we understand an historical Incarnation: the accomplishment of that half of the Magnum Opus which is glyphed in the mystic aphorism "Solve!" enables an Adept of that standing to see nothing but pure symbol and holy counsel in the no grosser legends of the Greeks.  This is not a matter of choice: reason forbids us to take the Swan-lover in its literal silliness and obscenity; but, on the other hand, the Bishops will not allow us to attach a pure interpretation to the precisely similar story of the Dove.<<Recently, a certain rash doctor publicly expressed his doubts whether any Bishop of the twentieth century was so filthy-minded a fool.  They were, however, soon dispelled by telegrams from a considerable section of the entire Bench, couched in emphatic language.>>
   So far am I, indeed, from attacking Christian symbolism as such, that I am quite prepared to admit that it is, although or rather because it is the lowest, the best.  Most others, especially Hinduism and Buddhism, lose themselves in metaphysical speculations only proper to those who are already Adepts.
   The Rosicrucian busies himself with the Next Step, for himself and his pupils; he is no more concerned to discuss Nibbana than a schoolmaster to "settle the doctrine of the enclithic GR:Delta-eta" in the mind of a child who is painfully grappling with the declension of GR:Nu-epsilon-alpha-nu-iota-alpha-sigma.  We can read even orthodox {220B} Christian writers with benefit (such is the revivifying force of our Elixir) by seeking the essence in the First Matter of the Work; and we could commend many of them, notably St. Ignatius and even the rationalising Mansel and Newman, if they would only concentrate upon spiritual truth, instead of insisting on the truth of things, material and therefore immaterial, which only need the touch of a scholar's wand to crumble into the base dust from which their bloodstained towers arose.
   Whoso has been crucified with Christ can but laugh when it is proved that Christ was never crucified.  The historian understands nothing of what we mean, either by Christ or by crucifixion, and is thus totally incompetent to criticise our position.  On the other hand, we are of course equally ill-placed to convert him; but then we do not wish to do so; certainly not "qua" historian.  We leave him alone.  Whoso hath ears to hear, let him hear! and the first and last ordeals and rewards of the Adept are comprised in the maxim "Keep silence!"
   There should be no possible point of contact between the Church and the world: Paul began the ruin of Christianity, but Constantine completed it.  The Church which begins to exteriorise is already lost.  To control the ethics of the state is to adopt the ethics of the state: and the first duty of the state will be to expel the rival god Religion.  In such a cycle we in England seem to be now revolving, and the new forced freedom of the Church is upon us.
   If only the destruction is sufficiently complete, if only all England will turn Atheist, we may perhaps be able to find some Christians here and there.  As long as "church" means either a building, an assembly, or even has any meaning at all of a kind to be intelligible to the ordinary man, so long is Christ rejected, and the Pharisee supreme.
   Now the materialism which has always {221A} been the curse of Christianity was no doubt partly due to the fact that the early disciples were poor men.  You cannot bribe a rich man with loaves and fishes: only the overfed long from the Simple Life.  True, Christ bought the world by the promise of Fasts and Martyrdoms, glutted as it was by its surfeit of Augustan glories; but the poor were in a vast majority, and snatched greedily at all the gross pleasures and profits of which the educated and wealthy were sick even unto death.  Further, the asceticism of surfeit is a false passion, and only lasts until a healthy hunger is attained; so that the change was an entire corruption, without redeeming aspect.  Had there been five righteous men in Rome, a Cato, a Brutus, a Curtius, a Scipio, and a Julian, nothing would have occurred; but there was only the last, and he too late.  No doubt Maximus, his teacher, was too holy an Adept to mingle in the affairs of the world; one indeed, perhaps, about to pass over to a higher sphere of action: such speculation is idle and impertinent; but the world was ruined, as never before since the fabled destruction of Atlantis, and I trust that I shall take my readers with me when I affirm so proud a belief in the might of the heart whose integrity is unassailable, clean of all crime, that I lay it down as a positive dictum that only by the decay in the mental and moral virility of Rome and not otherwise, was it possible for the slavish greed and anarchy of the Faith of Paul to gain a foothold.  This faith was no new current of youth, sweeping away decadence: it was a force of the slime: a force with no single salutary germ of progress inherent herein.  Even Mohammedanism, so often accused of materialism, did produce, at once, and in consequence, a revival of learning, a crowd of algebraists, astronomers, philosophers, whose names are still to be revered: but within the fold, from the death of Christ to the Renaissance -- a purely pagan movement -- we hear no more {221B} of art, literature, or philosophy.<<Such philosophy as does exist is entirely vicious, taking its axioms no more from observed fact, but from "Scripture" or from Aristotle.  Barring such isolated pagans as M. Aurelius Antoninus, and the neo-Platonists, those glorious decadents* of paganism.
    *  Decadence marks the period when the adepts, nearing their earthly perfection, become true adepts, not mere men of genius.  They disappear, harvested by heaven: and perfect darkness (apparent death) ensues until the youthful forerunners of the next crop begin to shoot in the form of artists.  Diagramatically:

         T H E   I N V I S I B L E    .                                 .
 .---------------------------------..-------.-------------------------.------.
 :       T H E   V I S I B L E  .   :       :                  S   .         :
^:                     S     .      :       :                T   .           :
|:                   T    . :       :       :              P  .              :
|:                 P    .   :       :       :            E  .                :
S:               E   .      :       :       :          D .                   :
p:             D   .        :       :       :        A . Link (between adepts:
a:           A  .           :       :       :       .   : and  world) breaks.:
c:            .             :       :       :     .   _ _               .    :
e:         .   MANKIND _  _ :       :       :  .  _ -     _  MANKIND . _     :
 :      _.    _  - _ -      :- _   _:_     _:._ -          - _ _  _._ -      :
 :_ - - :  -                :    -  :  - -  :                                :
 .------+-------------------+-------+-------+--------------------------------.
        :                   :Deca-  : Slime.:
        :                   :dence. :       :
    TIME:-->                :Adepts :Adepts :
        :Renaissance. Adepts:  as   :invis- :Renaissance, etc.
        :as Artists, Philo- :Adepts :ible   :
        :sophers, Men of    : They  :to all.:
        :Science, &c.  More :appear,:       :
        :or less recognised :but as :       :
        :(sooner or later)  : fools :       :
        :as great men.      :  and  :       :
        :                   :knaves.:       :
  By the Progress of the World we mean that she is always giving adepts to God, and thus losing them; yet, through their aid, while they are still near enough to humanity to attract it, she reaches each time a higher point.  Yet this point is never very high; so that Aeschylus, though in fact more ignorant than our schoolboys, holds his seat besides Ibsen and Newton in the Republic of the Adepti -- a good horse, but not to be run too hard. -- A. C.>>  But we do hear -- well, what Gibbon has to say.
   There is surely a positive side to all this; we agree that Pagans must have been more spiritual than their successors, if only because themselves openly scoffed at their mythology without in the least abandoning the devout performance of its rites, while the Christian clung to irrelevant historical falsehood as if it were true and important.  But it is justifiable -- nay, urgent -- to inquire how and why?  Which having discovered, we are bound to proceed with the problem: "Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?" receive the answer: "By taking heed thereto according {222A} to thy word," and interpret "thy word" as "The Works of Aleister Crowley."
   But this is to anticipate; let us answer the first question by returning to our phrase "The Church that exteriorises is already lost."  On that hypothesis, the decay of Paganism was accomplished by the very outward and visible sign of its inward and spiritual grace, the raising of massive temples to the Gods in a style and manner to which history seeks in vain a parallel.  Security is mortals' chiefest enemy; so also the perfection of balanced strength which enabled Hwang-sze to force his enemies to build the Great Wall was the mark of the imminent decay of his dynasty and race -- truly a terrible "Writing on the Wall."  An end to the days of the Nine Sages; an end to the wisdoms of Lao Tan on his dun cow; an end to the making of classics of history and of odes and of ethics, to the Shu King and the Shih King, and the Li-Ki, {222B} and the mysterious glories of the holy Yi King itself!  Civilisation, decadence, and the slime.  Still the Great Wall keeps the Barbarians from China: it is the wall that the Church of Christ set up against science and philosophy, and even to-day its ruins stand, albeit wrapped in the lurid flames of Hell.  It is the law of life, this cycle; decadence is perfection, and the perfect soul is assumed into the bosom of Nephthys, so that for a while the world lies fallow.  It is in failing to see this constant fume of incense rising from the earth that pessimistic philosophies make their grand fundamental error: in that, and in assuming the very point in dispute, the nature of the laws of other worlds and the prospects of the individual soul.  Confess, O subtle author, that thou thyself art even now in the same trap!  Willingly, reader; these slips happen when, although one cannot prove to others, one knows.<<Let me run wild for once, I beg; I am tired of emulating Mr. Storer Clouston's Sir Julian Wallingford, "whose reasoning powers were so remarkable that he never committed the slightest action without furnishing a full and adequate explanation of his conduct." -- A. C.>>  Thou too shall know, and thou wilt: -- ask how, and we come suddenly back to our subject, just as a dreamer may wander through countless nightmares, to find himself in the end on the top of a precipice, whence falling, he shall find himself in bed.
   Hear wisdom! the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind.
   A man is almost obliged to be in communion with God when God is blowing his hat off, drenching him to the skin, whistling through his very bones, scaring him almost to death with a flash of lightning, and so on.  When he gets time to think, he thinks just that.  In a church all is too clearly the work of man: in the matter of man's comfort man's devices are so obviously superior to God's: so that we compare hats and languidly discuss the preacher.
   Religion is alive in Wales, because people have to walk miles to chapel. {223A}
   Religion is alive among Mohammedans, who pray (as they live) out of doors, and who will fight and die for their ideas; and among Hindus, whose bloody sacrifices bring them daily face to face with death.
  Pan-Islam is possible; pan-Germany is possible; but pan-Christendom would be absurd.  There were saints in the times of the Crusades, and Crusaders in the times of the Saints: for though the foe was more artificial than real, and the object chimerical, a foe and an aim of whatever sort assist the concentration which alone is life.
   So that we need not be surprised to see as we do that religion is dead in London, where it demands no greater sacrifice than that of an hour's leisure in the week, and even offers to repay that with social consideration for the old, and opportunities of flirtation for the young.
   The word "dear" has two senses, and these two are one.
   Pressing the "out-of-doors" argument, as we may call it, I will challenge each of my readers to a simple experiment.
   Go out one night to a distant an lonely heath, if no mountain summit is available: then at midnight repeat the Lord's Prayer, or any invocation with which you happen to be familiar, or one made up by yourself, or one consisting wholly of senseless and barbarous words.<<I am ashamed to say that I have devoted considerable time to the absurd task of finding meanings for, and tracing the corruptions of, the "barbarous names of evocation" which occur in nearly all conjurations, and which Zoroaster warns his pupils not to change, because "they are names divine, having in the sacred rites a power ineffable."
  The fact is that many such names are indeed corruptions of divine names.  We may trace Eheieh in Eie, Abraxas in Abrae, Tetragrammaton in Jehovah.
  But this, an initiate knows, is quite contrary to the true theory.
  It is "because" the names are senseless that they are effective.  If a man is really praying he cannot bring himself to utter ridiculous things to his God, just as Mark Twain observes that one "cannot pray a lie."  So that it is a sublime test of faith to utter either a lie or a jest, this with reverence, and that with conviction.  Achieve it; the one becomes the truth, the other a formula of power.  Hence the real value of the Egyptian ritual by which the theurgist identified himself with the power he invoked.  Modern neophytes should not (we think) use the old conjurations with their barbarous names, because, imperfectly understanding the same, they may superstitiously attribute some real power to them; we shall rather advise "Jack and Jill went up the hill," "From Greenland's icy mountains," and such, with which it is impossible for the normal mind to associate a feeling of reverence.
  What may be the mode of operation of this formula concerns us little; enough if it succeeds.  But one may suggest that it is a case of the will running free, "i.e." unchecked, as it normally is, by the hosts of critical larvae we call reason, habit, sensation, and the like.
  But the will freed from these may run straight and swift; if its habitual goal has been the attainment of Samadhi, it may under such circumstances reach it.  It will require a very advanced student to use this type of faith.  The Lord's Prayer and the minor exaltation are the certainties for this event. -- A. C.>>  Repeat it solemnly and {223B} aloud, expectant of some great and mysterious result.
   I pledge myself, if you have a spark of religion in you, that is, if you are properly a human being, that you will (at the very least) experience a deeper sense of spiritual communion that you have ever obtained by any course of church-going.
   After which you will, if you are worth your salt, devote your life to the development of this communion, and to the search for an instructed master who can tell you more than I can.
   Now the earlier paganism is simply overflowing with this spirit of communion.  The boy goes down to the pool, musing, as boys will; is it strange that a nymph should reward him, sometimes even with wine from the purple vats of death?
   Poor dullards! in your zeal to extinguish the light upon our altars you have had to drench your own with the bitter waters of {224A} most general unbelief.  Where are the witches and the fairies and the angels, and the visions of the divine St. John?  You are annoyed at my mention of angels and witches; because you know yourselves to be sceptics, and that I have any amount of "scriptural warrant" to throw at your heads, if I deigned; you are all embarassed when Maude Adams leans over the footlights with a goo-goo accent so excessive that you die of diabetes in a week, and asks you point-blank: "Do you believe in fairies?" while, for your visions, you do not go to St. John's Island, and share his exile; but to his Wood, and waste your money.
   The early pagan worships Demeter in dim groves; there is silence; there is no organisation of ritual; there the worship is spontaneous and individual.  In short, the work of religion is thrown upon the religious faculty, instead of being delegated to the quite inferior and irrelevant faculties of mere decorum or even stage-craft.  A Christian of the type of Browning understands this perfectly.  True, he approves the sincerity which he finds to pervade the otherwise disgusting chapel; but he cares nothing whatever for the "raree-show of Peter's successor," and though I daresay his ghost will be shocked and annoyed by my mention of the fact, Browning himself does not get his illumination in any human temple, but only when he is out with the universe alone in the storm.
   Nor does Browning anywhere draw so perfect and so credible a picture of the intercourse between man and God as the exquisite vision of Pan in "Pheidippides."  It is all perfectly natural and therefore miraculous; there is no straining at the gnats of vestment in the hope of swallowing the camel of Illumination.
   In the matter of Pentecost, we hear only, in the way of the "conditions of the experiment," that "they were all with one accord in one place."  Now, this being {224B} the only instance in the world's history of more than two people in one place being of one accord, it is naturally also the only instance of a miracle which happened in church.
   The Quakers, arguing soundly enough that women were such a cause of contention chiefly on account of their tongues, and getting a glimpse of these truths which I have so laboriously been endeavouring to expound, hoped for inspiration from the effects of silence alone, and strove (even by a symbolic silence in costume) to repeat the experiment of Pentecost.
   But they lacked the stimulus of Syrian air, and that of the stirring times of the already visible sparks of national revolt: they should have sought to replace these by passing the bottle round in their assemblies, and something would probably have happened, an 'twere only a raid of the police.
   Better get forty shillings or a month that live and die as lived and died John Bright!
   Better be a Shaker, or a camp-meeting homunculus, or a Chataqua gurl, or a Keswick week lunatic, or an Even Roberts revivalist, or even a common maniac, than a smug Evangelical banker's clerk with a greasy wife and three gifted children -- to be bank clerks after him!
   Better be a flagellant, or one who dances as David danced before the Lord, than a bishop who is universally respected, even by the boys he used to baste when he was headmaster of a great English public school!
   That is, if religion is your aim: if you are spiritually minded: if you interpret every phenomenon that is presented to your sensorium as a particular dealing of God with your soul.
   But if you come back from the celebration of the Eucharist and say, "Mr. Hogwash was very dull to-day," you will never get to heaven, where the good poets live, and nobody else; nor to hell, whose inhabitants are exclusively bad poets.  {225A}
   There is more hope for a man who should go to Lord's and say he saw the angels of God ascending and descending upon C. B. Fry.
   It is God who sees the possibility of Light in Chaos; it is the Churches who blaspheme the superb body of Truth which Adepts of old enshrined in the Cross, by degrading the Story of the Crucifixion to a mere paragraph in the "Daily Mail" of the time of Pontius Pilate.
   Bill Blake took tea with Ezekiel: Tennyson saw no more in the Arthurian legends than a prophecy of the Prince Consort (though Lancelot has little in common with John Brown), and the result of all is that Tennyson is dead and buried -- as shown by the fact that he is still popular -- and Blake lives, for poets read and love him.
   Now when Paganism became popular, organised, state-regulated, it ceased to be individual: that is to say, it ceased to exist as a religion, and became a social institution little better than the Church which has replaced it.  But initiates -- men who had themselves seen God face to face, and lived -- preserved the vital essence.  They chose men; they tested them; they instructed them in methods of invoking the Visible Image of the Invisible.  Thus by a living chain religion lived -- in the Mysteries of Eleusis.
   Further, recognising that the Great Work was henceforth to be secret, a worship of caverns and midnight groves and catacombs, no more of open fields and smiling bowers, they caused to be written in symbols by one of the lesser initiates the whole Mystery of Godliness, so that after the renaissance those who were fitted to the work might infallibly discover the first matter of the Work and even many of the processes thereof.
   Such writings are those of the neo-Platonists, and in modern times the God-illumined Adept Berkeley, Christian though the called himself, is perhaps the most distinguished {225B} of those who have understood this truth.
<<EXTRACTS FROM BERKELEY'S                EXTRACTS FROM THE BOOK OF THE
            LIFE                            SACRED MAGIC OF ABRAMELIN
                                                     THE MAGE
{1} "There is a mystery about this visit     I resolved to absent myself
to Dublin.  'I propose to set out for      suddenly and go away . . . 
Dublin about a month hence,' he writes     and lead a solitary life.
to 'dear Tom,' 'but of this you must not
give the least intimation to any one.  It
is of all things my earnest desire (and
for very good reasons) not to have it
known I am in Dublin.  Speak not, there-     I am about here to set down in
fore, one syllable of it to any mortal     writing the difficulties, temp-whatsoever.  When I formerly desired you   tations, and hindrances which
to take a place for me near the town, you  will be caused him by his own
gave out that you were looking for a       relations ... beforehand thou
retired lodging for a friend of yours;     shouldst arrange thine affairs
upon which everybody surmised me to be     in such wise that they can in no
the person.  I must beg you not to act     way hinder thee, no bring thee any
in the like manner now -- but to take      disquietude.
for me an entire house in your own
name, and as for yourself; for, all          I took another house at rent ...
things considered, I am determined upon    and I gave over unto one of my
a whole house, with no mortal in it but    uncles the care of providing the
a maid of your own getting, who is to      necessaries of life.
look on herself as your servant.  Let
there be two bedrooms, one for you,
another for me, and as you like you may
ever and anon lie there.
  "'I would have the house with necessary
furniture taken by the month (or otherwise
as you can), for I propose staying not
beyond that time, and yet perhaps I may.
  "'Take it as soon as possible. . . . Let
me entreat you to say nothing of this to
anybody, but to do the thing directly. ...
I would of all things have a proper place     "Should you perform this
in a retired situation, where I may have    Operation in a town, you should
access to fields, and sweet air, provided   take a house which is not at all
against the moment I arrive.  I am          overlooked by any one, seeing that
inclined to think one may be better         in this present day curiosity is
concealed in the outermost skirt of the     so strong that you ought to be
suburbs, than in country or within the      upon your guard; and there ought
town.  A house quite detached in the        to be a garden (adjoining the
country I should have no objections to,     house) wherein you can take
provided you judge I shall not be liable    exercise."
to discovery in it.  The place called
Bermuda I am utterly against.
Dear Tom, do this matter cleanly and          "Consider then the safety of
cleverly, without waiting for further       your person, commencing this 
advice. ... To the person from whom you     operation in a place of safety,
hire it (whom alone I would have you        whence neither enemies nor any
speak to of it) it will not be strange      disgrace can drive you out before
at this time of year to be desirous for     the end."
your own convenience, or health, to have
a place in a free and open air!'
  "This mysterious letter was written in      "the season of Easter. ... Then
April.  From April till September Berkeley  first on the following day . . .
again disappears.  There is in all this a   I commenced this Holy Operation .
curious secretiveness of which one has      . . the period of the Six Moons
"repeated examples in his life."            being expired, the Lord
{AC NOTE EXTENSION: The Italics are ours.   granted unto me His grace . . ."
-ED.}  Whether he went to Dublin on that
occasion, or why he wanted to go, does
not appear."

  [2] "I abhor business, and especially       "a solitary life, which is the to have to do with great persons and        source of all good . . . once thou
great affairs."                             shalt have obtained the sacred
                                            science and magic the love for
                                            retirement will come to thee
  [3] "Suddenly, and without the least      of its own accord, and thou wilt
previous notice of pain, he was removed     voluntarily shun the commerce and
to the enjoyment of eternal rewards, and    conversation of men, &c."
although all possible means were instantly
used, no symptoms of life ever appeared       "a good death in His holy
after; nor could the physicians assign      Kingdom."
any cause for his death.
  It is surely beyond doubt that Berkeley contemplated some operation of a similar character to that of Abramelin.  Note the extreme anxiety which he displays.  What lesser matter could so have stirred the placid and angelic soul of Berkeley?  On what less urgent grounds would he have agreed to the deceptions (harmless enough though they are) that he urges upon his brother?
  That he at one time or another achieved success is certain from the universal report of his holiness and from the nature of his writings.  The repeated phrase in the Optics, "God is the Father of Lights,"{AC NOTE EXTENSION: It occurs in James 1, 17.} suggests an actual phrase perhaps used as an exclamation at the moment of a Vision to express, however feebly, its nature, rather than the phrase of a reasoner exercising his reason.
  This mysterious letter which so puzzles his biographer is in fact the key to his whole character, life, and opinions.
  This is no place to labour the point; I have at hand none of the necessary documents; but it might be worth the research of a scholar to trace Berkeley's progress through the grades of the Great Order. -- A. C.>>
   But the orthodox Christian, confronted with this fact, is annoyed; just as the American, knowing himself to be of the {226A} filthiest dregs of mankind, pretends that there is no such thing as natural aristocracy, though to be sure he gives himself away badly enough when confronted with either a nigger or a gentleman, since to ape {226B} dominance is the complement of his natural slavishness.  So the blind groveller, Mr. Conformity, and his twin, Mr. Nonconformity, agree to pretend that initiates are always either dupes or impostors; they deny that man can see God and live.  Look!  There goes John Compromise to church, speculating, like Lot's wife, on the probable slump in sulphur and the gloomy outlook for the Insurance Companies.  It will never do for his Christ to be a man of like passions with himself, else people might expect him to aim at a life like Christ's.  He wants to wallow and swill, and hope for an impossible heaven.
   So that it will be imprudent of you (if you want to be asked out to dinner) to point out that if you tell the story of the life of Christ, without mentioning names, to a Musulman, he will ask, "What was the {227A} name of that great sheikh?" to a Hindu, "Who was this venerable Yogi?" to a Buddhist, "Haven't you made a mistake to two?  I wasn't a dove, but an elephant with six tusks: and He died of dysentery."
   The fact being that it is within the personal experience of all these persons that men yet live and walk this earth who live in all essentials the life that Christ lived, to whom all His miracles are commonplace, who die His death daily, and partake daily in the Mysteries of His resurrection and ascension.
   Whether this is scientifically so or not is of no importance to the argument.  I am not addressing the man of science, but the man of intelligence: and the scientist himself will back me when I say that the evidence for the one is just as strong and as weak as {227B} for the others.  God forbid that I should rest this paper on a historical basis!  I am talking about the certain results of human psychology: and science can neither help nor hinder me.
   True, when Huxley and Tyndall were alive, their miserable intelligences were always feeding us up with the idea that science might one day be able to answer some of the simpler questions which one can put: but that was because of their mystical leanings; they are dead, and have left no successors.  To-day we have the certitude, "Science never can tell," of the laborious Ray Lankester

"Whose zeal for knowledge mocks the curfew's call,
And after midnight, to make Lodge look silly,
Studies anatomy -- in Piccadilly."

   Really, we almost echo his despair.  When, only too many years ago, I was learning chemistry, the text-books were content with some three pages on Camphor: to-day, a mere abstract of what is known occupies 400 closely printed pages: but the Knowledge is in no wise advanced.  It is no doubt more difficult to learn "Paradise Lost" by heart than "We are Seven"; but when you have done it, you are no better at figure-skating.
   I am not denying that the vast storehouses of fact do help us to a certain distillation (as it were) of their grain: but I may be allowed to complain with Maudsley that there is nobody competent to do it.  Even when a genius does come along, his results will likely be as empirical as the facts they cover.  Evolution is no better than creation to explain things, as Spencer showed.
   The truth of the matter appears to be that as reason is incompetent to solve the problems of philosophy and religion, "a fortiori" science is incompetent.  All that science can do is to present reason with new facts.  To such good purpose has it done this, that no modern scientist can hope to do more than know a little about one bud on his pet twig of the particular branch he has {228A} chosen to study, as it hangs temptingly from one bough of the Tree of Knowledge.
   One of the most brilliant of the younger school of chemists remarks in the course of a stirring discourse upon malt analysis: "Of extremely complex organic bodies the constitution of some 250,000 is known with certainty, and the number grows daily.  No one chemist pretends to an intimate acquaintance with more than a few of these ..."  Why not leave it alone, and try to be God?
   But even had we Maudsley's committee of geniuses, should we be in any real sense the better?  Not while the reason is, as at present, the best guide known to men, not until humanity has developed a mental power of an entirely different kind.  For to the philosopher it soon becomes apparent that reason is a weapon inadequate to the task.  Hume saw it, and became a sceptic in the widest sense of the term.  Mansel saw it, and counsels us to try Faith, as if it was not the very fact that Faith was futile that bade us appeal to reason.  Huxley saw it, and, no remedy presenting itself but a vague faith in the possibilities of human evolution, called himself an agnostic: Kant saw it for a moment, but it soon hid itself behind his terminology; Spencer saw it, and tried to gloss it over by smooth talk, and to bury it beneath the ponderous tomes of his unwiedly erudition.
   I see it, too, and the way out to Life.
   But the labyrinth, if you please, before the clue: the Minotaur before the maiden!
   Thank you, madam; would you care to look at our new line in Minotaurs at 2s. 3d.?  This way, please.
   I have taken a good deal of trouble lately to prove the proposition "All arguments are arguments in a circle."  Without wearying my readers with the formal proof, which I hope to advance one day in an essay on the syllogism, I will take (as sketchily as you please!) the obvious and important case of the consciousness.
   A. The consciousness is made up exclusively {228B} of impressions (The tendency to certain impressions is itself a result of impressions on the ancestors of the conscious being).  Locke, Hume, &c.
   B. Without a consciousness no impression can exist.  Berkeley, Fichte, &c.
   Both A. and B. have been proved times without number, and quite irrefutably.  Yet they are mutually exclusive.  The "progress" of philosophy has consisted almost entirely of advances in accuracy of language by rival schools who emphasised A. and B. alternately.
   It is easy to see that all propositions can, with a little ingenuity, be reduced to one form or the other.<<Compare the problems suggested to the logician by the various readings of propositions in connotation, denotation, and comprehension respectively; and the whole question of existential import. -- A. C.>>
   Thus, if I say that grass is green, I mean that an external thing is an internal thing: for the grass is certainly not in my eye, and the green certainly "is" in it.  As all will admit.
   So, if you throw a material brick at your wife, and hit her (as may happen to all of us), there is a most serious difficulty in the question, "At what point did your (spiritual) affection for her transform into the (material) brick, and that again into her (spiritual) reformation?"
   Similarly, we have Kant's clear proof that in studying the laws of nature we only study the laws of our own minds: since, for one thing, the language in which we announce a law is entirely the product of our mental conceptions.
   While, on the other hand, it is clear enough that our minds depend upon the laws of nature, since, for one thing, the apprehension that six savages will rob and murder you is immediately allayed by the passage of a leaden bullet weighting 230 grains, and moving at the rate of 1200 feet per second, through the bodies of two of the ringleaders.  {229A}
  It would of course be simple to go on and show that after all we attach no meaning to weight and motion, lead and bullet, but a purely spiritual one: that they are mere phases of our thought, as interpreted by our senses: and on the other that apprehension is only a name for a certain group of chemical changes in certain of the contents of our very material skulls: but enough! the whole controversy is verbal, and no more.
   Since therefore philosophy and "a fortiori" science are bankrupt, and the official receiver is highly unlikely to grant either a discharge; since the only aid we get from the Bishops is a friendly counsel to drink Beer -- in place of the spiritual wine of Omar Khayyam and Abdullah el Haji (on whom be peace!) -- we are compelled to fend for ourselves.
   We have heard a good deal of late years about Oriental religions.  I am myself the chief of sinners.  Still, we may all freely confess that they are in many ways picturesque: and they do lead one to the Vision of God face to face, as one who hath so been led doth here solemnly lift up his voice and testify; but their method is incredibly tedious, and unsuited to most, if not all, Europeans.  Let us never forget that no poetry of the higher sort, no art of the higher sort, has ever been produced by any Asiatic race.  We are the poets! we are the children of wood and stream, of mist and mountain, of sun and wind!  We adore the moon and the stars, and go into the London streets at midnight seeking Their kisses as our birthright.  We are the Greeks -- and God grant ye all, my brothers, to be as happy in your loves! -- and to us the rites of Eleusis should open the doors of Heaven, and we shall enter in and see God face to face!  Alas!

"None can read the text, not even I;
  And none can read the comment but myself."<<1>>   {229B}

<<1. Tennyson must have stolen these lines; they are simple and expressive.>>

The comment is the Qabalah, and that I have indeed read as deeply as my poor powers allow: but the text is decipherable only under the stars by one who hath drunken of the dew of the moon.
   Under the stars will I go forth, my brothers, and drink of that lustral dew: I will return, my brothers, when I have seen God face to face, and read within those eternal eyes the secret that shall make you free.  {230Atop}
   Then will I choose you and test you and instruct you in the Mysteries of Eleusis, oh ye brave hearts, and cool eyes, and trembling lips!  I will put a live coal upon your lips, and flowers upon your eyes, and a sword in your hearts, and ye also shall see God face to face.
    Thus shall we give back its youth to the world, for like tongues of triple flame we shall brood upon the Great Deep -- Hail unto the Lords of the Groves of Eleusis! {230Btop.  Full page below}



                               END OF VOL. III



{230}











                             A P P E N D I C E S











                                  APPENDIX A

                                    NOTES

             TOWARDS AN OUTLINE OF A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE WRITINGS
                  IN PROSE AND VERSE OF ALEISTER CROWLEY<<1>>

<<1. For the bulk of these notes we are indebted to the late Mr. L. C. R. Duncombe-Jewell.>>

                               {columns resume}



               EDITIONES PRINCIPES


                       (I)


                 [ACELDAMA: 1898]

Aceldama, | a Place to Bury Strangers in. | a philosophical poem | by a gentleman of the University of Cambridge. | privately printed | London: | 1898.

Collation: -- Crown 8vo, pp. 29, consisting of Half-title, quotation on
    reverse from "Songs of the Spirit," p. 13, ll. 1-4; Title-page as above,
    quotation on reverse St. John xii. 24, 25; prose Prologue, quotation on
    reverse Acts i, 18, 19; Dedication dated "Midnight, 1897-1898," on reverse
    "a toi"; second half-title, quotation on reverse from
    Swinburne's "The Leper"; "Poems and Ballads," 1866, pp. 1-10; Text, pp.
    11-27; no headline; Epilogue p. 28; no imprint, but printed by an obscure
    printer in the Brompton-road, London.

Edition: 2 copies on vellum, numbered 1, 2;<<1>> 20 copies on Japanese vellum,
    numbered 3 - 12;<<2>> 88 copies on hand-made paper, numbered 13-100.

   Issued in Japanese vellum turned-in wrapper repeating title-page.

<<1. These large-paper copies measure 7 1/2 x 20, printed on thick vellum, wrapper of Japanese vellum.>>
<<2. These large-paper copies measure 7 1/2 x 10, on thick Japanese vellum, wrapper of thin Japanese vellum.>>

           [THE TALE OF ARCHAIS: 1898]

The | Tale of Archais | a Romance in Verse | by a Gentleman of the University | of Cambridge {233A} | London | Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. | MDCCCXCVIII.

Collation: -- Pott 4to, pp. viii + 89, consisting of Half-title, Title-page in
    red and black as above (with imprint: "Chiswick Press: -- Charles
    Whittingham & Co. | Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London." on reverse), pp.
    iii - iv.; Dedication "To | The White Maidens of England | this Tale of
    Greece | is | dedicated" (with blank reverse), pp. v - vi; continued in
    verse, pp. vii - viii.; Prologue in verse, pp. 1 - 5; second Half-title,
    p. 7; Text, pp. 8 - 84; Epilogue, pp. 85 - 89.  There are headlines
    throughout.  The imprint -- "Chiswick Press: -- Charles Whittingham and
    Co. | Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London." -- is repeated at the foot of
    the last page.

Editon: 2 copies on Roman vellum, 250 on hand-made paper.

  Issued in slate-blue, dull-green, and brick-red boards with white holland backs, and white paper back label.  The published price was five shillings.


        [THE HONOURABLE ADULTERERS: 1899]

The | Honourable Adulterers | a tragedy | by A. E. C. | 1899.

Collation: -- Demy 8vo, cut edges, pp. 8, pagination from 119 - 126,<<1>>
    consisting of Title {233B} as above; Text, pp. 119 - 126.  Headlines
    throughout.  No  imprint.

Edition: 5 copies, on smooth purplish paper.

   Issued in blue paper wrapper, repeating title page.

<<1. The pagination is accounted for by the fact that these three pamphlets were printed off from the paged type of "Jephthah and Other Mysteries," then in the press, and issued separately.>>


               [JEPHTHAH AND OTHER
                 MYSTERIES 1899]

Jephthah | and other mysteries | lyrical and dramatic | by Aleister Crowley | London: Kegan Paul, Trench, | Trubner and Company, Ltd. | 1899 | "all rights reserved."

Collation: -- Demy 8vo, pp. xxii + 233, consisting of Half-title, quotation on
   reverse from "Il Penseroso;" Title page as above, quotation on reverse from
   SAPPHO; Quotation from "The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin the
   Mage"; on reverse "The dedication | is to | Algernon Charles Swinburne";
   Dedication in verse, pp. vii - xii; Contents, pp. xiii - xiv; Prelude, xv
   - xxi; second Half-title, "Jephthah, | a tragedy," on reverse quotation
   from "Hamlet;" second Dedication, "To | Gerald Kelly, | poet and painter, |
   I dedicate | this tragedy"; dated "Cambridge, November, 1898."  Text, pp.
   5 - 221; Epilogue, pp. 222 - 223.  On reverse, imprint "Chiswick Press: --
   Charles Whittingham and co. | Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London,"
   surmounted by colophon, upon a mound, "a lion rampant, grasping an anchor
   entwined with a dolphin, the flukes and head in base."  Advertisements at
   end of book pp. 8.  Headlines throughout.

Editions: 1000 copies on machine-made paper, 6 copies on India paper.

   Issued in brick-red boards, linen backs, white paper label, "Crowley | Jephthah | & other | mysteries | lyrical & | dramatic | Kegan Paul, | Trench | Trubner & | Co. Ltd. | 1899 | Price 7s. 6d."  The six India-paper copies issued in old gold coloured buckram, lettered on cover "Jephthah" in red.


           [SONGS OF THE SPIRIT: 1898]

Songs of the Spirit | by | Aleister Crowley | "Sublimi feriam sidera vertice" HOR. | London | Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. | MDCCCXCVIII.

Collation: -- Pott 8bvo, pp. x + 109.  Half-title; on reverse, quotation from
    "The Tale of" {234A} "Archais;" Title in red and black as above; reverse,
    quotation from "Ecclesiastes," "a fool also is full of words," p. iv.
    Dedication in verse to J. L. B.,<<1>> pp. v - vii.  Contents, pp. ix - x;
    Second Half-title; Text, pp. 3 - 104; Epilogue, pp. 105 - 109.  Imprint on
    last page, "Chiswick Press: -- Charles Whitingham and Co. | Tooks Court,
    Chancery Lane, London"; surmounted by colophon.  No headlines.

Edition: 1 copy on vellum, 50 copies on hand-made paper numbered and
    signed,<<2>> 300 copies on machine-made paper.

   Issued in Japanese vellum with gold lettering on front of cover "Songs of the Spirit" for copies printed on hand-made paper; and in grey cloth boards, lettered on back "Songs | of the | Spirit | Aleister Crowley | 1898" in crimson for those printed on machine-made paper.  Priced 3s. 6d.

<<1. J. L. Baker, the alchymist.>>
<<2. Carelessly done or not done at all.>>


                 [THE POEM: 1898]

The Poem | a little drama in four scenes | by | Aleister Crowley | printed privately | London | 1898.

Collation: -- Demy 8vo, cut edges, pp. 20, pagination 99 - 118*; consisting of
    Half-title, "The Poem. | a little drama in four scenes"; Dedication, p.
    101; Text, pp. 103 - 117.  Headlines throughout.  No imprint.

Edition: 10 copies on smooth paper.

   Issued in Japanese vellum wrapper repeating title-page.


                 [JEZEBEL: 1898]

Jezebel | and other | Tragic Poems | By Count Vladimir Svareff | Edited, with an Introduction and Epilogue, by | Aleister Crowley | Vignette of Armorial Design of Chiswick Press | London | Privately printed at the Chiswick Press | 1898.

Collation: -- Demy 4to, pp. 23, with 8 unnumbered preliminary pages printed
    from the Caxton fount of antique type; Half-title; Title as above,
    "Jezebel" and "London" in red; Dedication in verse dated, "Londres, Juin
    1898," in French, {234B} "a Gerald"; Contents; Introduction in verse
    signed "A. C." p. i.; Text, pp. 3 - 22; Epilogue signed "A. C." p. 23;
    colophon, printer's mark, "argent, a printer's maul in pale," the shield
    surrounded by a scroll; below the imprint, "Chiswick Press: Tooks Court,
    Chancery Lane, London."  No headlines.

Edition: 2 copies on vellum, 10 copies on Japanese vellum, 40 copies on hand-
    made paper.

   Issued in Japanese vellum turned-in wrapper, with legend "Jezebel | and other Tragic Poems" enclosed in ornamental border on front of cover in gold.  Unpriced: copies were sold at half-a-guinea.


            [AN APPEAL TO THE AMERICAN
                 REPUBLIC: 1899]

Price Sixpence | An Appeal | to the | American Republic | design of Union Flag and United States Ensign crossed | by | Aleister Crowley | London | Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. Ltd. | 1899.

Collation: -- Demy 4to, pp. 12.  Crimson wrapper and Title-page in one.  Text,
    pp. 1 - 12.  Imprint at foot of last page, "Chiswick Press: Charles
    Whittingham and Co., Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London."

Edition: 500 copies on machine-made paper.


                 [JEPHTHAH: 1898]

Jephthah | a Tragedy | by | a gentleman of the University of | Cambridge | (Aleister Crowley) | London | 1898 | [not for sale].

Collation: -- Demy 8vo, cut edges, pp. 71; consisting of Half-title, "Jephthah
    | a tragedy," on reverse quotation from "Hamlet;" Dedication "To | Gerald
    Kelly, | Poet Painter, | I dedicate | this tragedy; because his friendship
    was the turquoise, which I had of him before I was a bachelor; and which I
    would not have given for a wilderness of monkeys."<<1>> Dated "Cambridge,
    November 1898"; {235A} Text, pp. 5 - 69; "A Note on Jephthah," pp. 70 -
    71.  Headlines throughout.  No imprint.

Edition: 25 copies on machine-made paper.

   Issued in grey paper with an auto-lithograph in black ink, "Aleister Crowley | Jephthah," on cover.

<<1. The reference is to "The Merchant of Venice," Act III, Scene 1."Bachelor" refers to the degree of "B.A.," which the Author was expecting to take at the time of writing the Dedication; but which in fact he did not take.>>


           [THE MOTHER'S TRAGEDY: 1901]

The Mother's | Tragedy | and | Other Poems | by | Aleister Crowley | Privately printed | 1901.

Collation: -- Medium 8vo, pp. xii + 111: consisting of Half-title; Title as
    above; Contents, pp. v - vi; Prologue, pp. vii - xii; Text, pp. 1 - 106;
    Epilogue, pp. 107 - 111.  No imprint.  Headlines throughout.

Edition: 500 copies on machine-made paper.

   Issued in blue boards, linen backs, white paper back-label, "Crowley | The | Mother's | Tragedy | and other | Poems."  Priced at 5s. 0d.


            [THE SOUL OF OSIRIS: 1901]

The Soul of Osiris | a history | by | Aleister Crowley | London: Kegan Paul, Trench | Trubner and Company, Ltd. | 1901 | "All rights reserved."

Collation: -- Medium 8vo, pp. ix + 129; consisting of Half-title; Title as
    above, on reverse imprint "Chiswick Press: Charles Whittingham and Co. |
    Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London"; Contents, pp. v - vi; Prologue, pp.
    vii - ix; Text, pp. 3 - 129; Epilogue, "The Epilogue is silence," on
    reverse imprint of Chiswick Press as before.

Edition: 500 copies on machine-made paper, 6 copies on India paper.

   Issued in brick-red boards, linen backs, white paper back-label, "Crowley | The | Soul | of | Osiris | Kegan Paul, Trench | Trubner & | Co. Ltd.  Price 5s. 0d.


             [CARMEN SAECULARE: 1901]

Carmen Saeculare | by | St. E. A. of M. and S. | London | Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner {235B} & Co. Ltd. | Paternoster House, Charing Cross Road | 1901.

Collation: -- Demy 4to, pp. 30; consisting of Half-title; Dedication to "The
    Countess of Glenstrae"; Title as above; Prologue, pp. 5 - 7; Text pp. 9 -
    25; Epilogue, pp. 27 - 30, dated "S. S. Pennsylvania, July 4, 1900."  No
    headlines.

Edition: 450 copies on machine-made paper, 6 copies on Roman vellum and 50
    copies (?) on hand-made paper with title-page, "Carmen Saeculare | by |
    St. E. A. of M. and S. | Privately issued | London, 1901"

   Issued in green paper wrapper repeating title-page with design of shamrock in centre.  Price 1s. 0d.


                [TANNHAUSER: 1902]

Tannhauser | A story of all time | by | Aleister Crowley | London | Kegan Paul;, Trench, Trubner & Co. Ltd. | Paternoster House, Charing Cross Road | 1902.

Collation: -- Demy 4to, 142 pp., consisting of Half-title, quotation on
   reverse from Browning's "Master Hughes of Saxe-Gotha;" Title-page as above,
   on reverse "all rights reserved"; Dedication in verse, pp. 5 - 7; Prose
   preface, pp. 9 - 16, dated "Kandy, Ceylon, Sept. 1901."  Second Half-
   title; Text, pp. 18 - 142.  Imprint at foot, "Turnbull and Spears,
   Printers, Edinburgh."  Two pages of advertisements at end.  No headlines.

Edition: 6 copies on Japanese vellum, 500 copies on machine-made paper.

   Issued in royal-blue boards, linen backs, white paper back-label, "Crowley | Tannhauser<<Note the misprint of "a u-umlaut" for "a-umlaut u.">> | a story of | all time | Kegan Paul, | Trench, | Trubner & | Co. Ltd. | 1902.  Price 5s. 0d.


             [NEW YEAR'S CARD, 1903]

New Year, 1903

  A sonnet printed in gold on fly-sheets of Roman vellum (12) and hand-made paper (50) within a broad scarlet border, size 5 7/8 x 6 7/8, "from Aleister Crowley, | wishing you a speedy termination of existence."  Printed throughout in capital letters.  {236A}


                [BERASHITH: 1903]

A. B. 2447, | Paris | HB:Bet-Resh-Aleph-Shin-Taw | and Essay | in | ontology | with some remarks on ceremonial magic | by | Abhavananda | (Aleister Crowley) | Privately printed for the Sangha of | the West.

Collation: -- Size 9 x 7 3/8, pp. 24, consisting of Title-page and wrapper in
    one as above, on reverse, Number of Copy and Errata; Text, pp. 1 - 24;
    Imprint at foot of last page, "Clarke & Bishop, Printers, Etc., 338, Rue
    St. Honore, Paris."  No headlines.

Edition: 200 copies on China paper numbered.

   Issued in wrapper and title in one on machine-made paper 10 5/8 x 8 5/16. Price 5 francs.


               [SUMA SPES: undated]

Summa | Spes | Aleister | Crowley.

Collation: -- Single poem on Japanese vellum 9 x 7 1/8, printed in red with
    green ornamental border.  Photograph of Haweis and Coles in front, and
    colophon by T. Spicer Simpson on back.


                  [BALZAC: 1903]

Balzac | "Hommage a Auguste Rodin."

   A sonnet which occurs in "Ahab" in a slightly altered form.  Was issued in Paris by request, on a single unfolded sheet of Japanese vellum 14 5/8 x 9 1/4 inches: 3 copies printed vertically, and 15 horizontally on the right half of the paper; also 6 copies on China paper 12 3/8 x 9 1/2 inches printed vertically in the upper moiety of the sheet.  No imprint.


                   [AHAB: 1903]

Ahab | and other Poems | By Aleister Crowley | with an introduction and Epilogue by | Count Vladimir Svareff | Design of the Chiswick Press, vignette | London.  Privately printed at the Chiswick Press | 1903.

Collation: -- Demy 4to, pp. 35, and 6 unnumbered preliminary pages, consisting
    of half-title; Title in red and black as above; Dedication in verse to G.
    C. J.,<<1>> dated Paris, December 9, 1902; Contents; {236B} Rondel, p. 1;
    Text, pp. 3 - 33; Epilogue, signed "V. S.," p. 35.  Printed from the
    Caxton fount of antique type: no headlines: no imprint.

Edition: 2 copies on vellum, 10 copies on Japanese vellum, 150 copies on hand-
    made paper.

   Issued in Japanese vellum turned-in wrapper with legend "Ahab | and other poems" enclosed in ornamental border on front of cover in gold.  Price 5s. 0d.

<<1. George Cecil Jones, the Theurgist.>>


                  [ALICE: 1903]

Alice: an | Adultery | privately printed | 1903.

Collation: -- Fcp. 8vo, pp. xx + 95, consisting of Half-title, Title as above;
    Introduction by the Editor dated "Yokohama, April, 1901," pp. i - xii;
    Critical Essay on "Alice" signed "G. K.,"<<1>> pp. xiii - xx.  Prefatory
    poems, pp. 1 - 17.  Second Half-title; Text, pp. 21 - 95.  No headlines.
    No imprint.

Edition: 100 copies on China paper.  Price to subscribers, 10s. 6d.; published
    price, 21s. od.

   Issued in green camel-hair, turned-in wrapper lettered on front cover, "Alice," in white.

<<1. Gerald Kelly.  Both the Introduction and Critical Essay are the result of the collaboration of four men -- A. C., G. K., D. J.- F., and I. B.>>


              [THE GOD-EATER: 1903]

The God-Eater | A Tragedy of Satire | by | Aleister Crowley | Watts & Co. | 17 Johnson's Court, Fleet Street, London, E. C. | 1903.

Collation: -- Cr. 4to, pp. 32, consisting of Half-Title, on reverse
    announcement of works "by the same author"; Title-page as above;
    Dedication; Text, pp. 7 - 32, Imprint "R. Clay and Sons, Ltd., Bread St.
    Hill, E. C., and Bungay, Suffolk," at foot of last page.

Edition: 2 copies on Roman vellum, 300 on machine-made paper.

   Issued in green camel-hair wrapper lettered in red, "The | God-eater | A Tragedy | of Satire | By | Aleister Crowley | Watts & Co. | 17 Johnson's Court, Fleet Street, London, E. C. | 1903."  Price 2s. 6d.  {237A}



                [THE STAR AND THE
                  GARTER: 1903]

The Star & | The Garter | By Aleister | Crowley | Watts & Co. | 17 Johnson's Court | London | 1903.

Collation: -- Demy 4to, pp. 89, consisting of Half-title; Title-page as above;
    Invocation in Greek; Text, pp. 7 - 77; Appendix, prose and verse, pp. 79 -
    86; Press notices, pp. 87 - 89; reply to Invocation in Greek, p. 78;
    advertisement one page.  Imprint in centre of last page, "printed by
    Turnbull and Spears, Edinburgh."

Edition: 2 copies on Roman vellum, fifty copies on hand-made paper.

   Issued in green camel's-hair wrapper, lettered in white on front of cover, "The | Star & | The Garter | by Aleister | Crowley."


              [THE ARGONAUTS: 1904]

The Argonauts | by | Aleister Crowley | Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth | Boleskine, Foyers, Inverness | 1904.

Collation: -- Crown 8vo, pp. 102, consisting of Half-title; Title-page as
    above; sub-title, "Jason,"<<1>> dedication on reverse; Text of "Jason,"
    pp. 3 - 17; sub-title of "Argo," dedication on reverse; Text of "Argo,"
    pp. 3 - 19; sub-title "Medea," dedication on reverse; Text of "Medea," p.
    3 - 19; sub-title "Sirenae," dedication on reverse; Text of "Sirenae," pp.
    3 - 24; sub-title "Ares," dedication on reverse; Text of "Ares," pp. 3 -
    23.  Imprint at foot of last page, "Chiswick Press: printed by Charles
    Whittingham and Co | Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London."  Announcement of
    works by the same author on reverse.  No headlines.

Edition: 2 copies on Roman vellum, 200 copies on machine-made paper.

   Issued in green camel's-hair wrapper, lettered in red on front of cover, "The Argonauts | by | Aleister Crowley."  Price 5s. 0d.  {237B}

<<1. Each Act is a separate play on the Greek model separately paginated.>>


            [THE SWORD OF SONG: 1904]

The Sword of Song | called by Christians | The Book of the Beast | Aleister Crowley | Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth | Benares | 1904.

Collation: -- Post 4to, pp. ix + 194, printed in red and black, consisting of
    Half-title, parody of passage from "Through the Looking Glass" on reverse;
    Title-page as above, Dedication on reverse; Introductory poem "Nothung;"
    Half-title; Prose Introduction to "Ascension Day and Pentecost," pp. iii -
    ix; Text, pp. 1 - 62; Notes, pp. 63 - 91; Appendices, pp. 93 - 121;
    "HB:Bet-Resh-Aleph-Shin-Yod-Taw | an essay | in ontology | with some
    remarks on | ceremonial magic," pp. 123 - 148; "Science and Buddhism," pp.
    149 - 192; Epilogue in verse, pp. 193 - 194; Index on last page, imprint
    on reverse, "printed | by | Philippe Renouard | 19, rue des Saints-Peres,
    19 | Paris." Headlines throughout.

Editions: 100 copies on a glazed foreign paper.<<There were 10 advance copies
    issued in a crimson wrapper repeating title-page, on back "The Sword of
    Song" lengthwise, on back outside of cover colophon Louis Seize design,
    initials of designer "L. M.">>

   Issued in navy blue wrapper front page lettered in gold "Ye Sword | of Song," with design in centre "666" thrice repeated on a golden square ["vide" pp. 4 - 5 of book), on reverse publishers' advertisement; back of cover author's name in Hebrew characters adding up to "666," in gold; inside of back page of cover list of author's works in gold; back of cover "The | Sword | of | Song."  Price 10s. 0d.


                  [GOETIA: 1904]

The Book of the | Goetia | of | Solomon the King | translated into the English Tongue by a | Dead Hand | and adorned with divers other matters germane | delightful to the wise | the whole | edited, verified, introduced and commented | by | Aleister Crowley | Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth | Boleskine, Foyers, Inverness | 1904.

Collation: -- Demy 4to, pp. ix + 65, consisting of Half-title, Invocation in
    Greek on reverse; Frontispiece; Title-page as above, talisman on reverse;
    Prefatory Note, pp. v - vi; Preliminary Invocation, pp. vii - ix; Text,
    pp. 1 - 65; colophon of Chiswick {238A} Press Mark of reverse of last
    page.  No headlines.  Two illustrations besides Frontispiece.

Edition: 200 copies on machine-made paper, 1 copy on vellum, 10 copies on
    Japanese vellum.

   Issued in green camel's hair-wrapper, lettered in red "Goetia" in centre, surrounded by the legend "Goetia vel clavicula Salomonis Regis" frequently repeated.  Price 21s. 0d., raise from subscription price of 10s. 0d.
   Japanese vellum copies in white and gold.  Japanese vellum turned-in wrapper, same lettering.


              [WHY JESUS WEPT: 1904]

Why | Jesus Wept | a Study of Society | and of | The Grace of God | by | Aleister Crowley | Privately Printed | 1904.

Collation: -- Post 4to, pp. 16 + 80.  Half-title; advertisement (of the 21s.
    edition); Title as above; letter from author's mother, 2 pp.; Persons
    studied; Quotation from "Times" newspaper and John xi. 35.  Dedications 6
    pp. to various persons (all these pages unnumbered); Text, pp. 1 - 80;
    inset, a slip "Note to pp. 75-76; also, loose inset, a pamplet "Mr.
    Crowley and the Creeds" and "The Creed of Mr. Chesterton, &c. &c."  No
    imprint, but printed by Philippe Renouard.

Edition: 100 copies on hand-made paper, 20 in Japanese vellum; 1 on Roman
    vellum.

   Issued in turned-in Japanese wrapper; front, "Why | Jesus | Wept | Aleister
| Crowley |"; reverse, colophon of Press; back, "Why Jesus Wept."


            [ORACLES: THE BIOGRAPHY OF
                  AN ART: 1905]

Oracles | the biography of an art | unpublished fragments of the work of Aleister Crowley | with | explanatory notes by R. P. Lester and | the Author | 1905 | Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth | Boleskine, Foyers, Inverness.

Collation: -- Demy 8vo, pp. viii + 175 + 16 advertisements, consisting of
    Half-title: Title as above; prefatory note "To Explain"; Contents, pp.
    vii, viii; Text, pp. 1 - 175 {238B} Advertisement, pp. 1 - 16.  Headlines
    throughout.

Edition: 500 copies on machine-made paper.

   Issued in green camel-hair paper, on back in large white letters,
               ALEISTER
       ORACLES
               CROWLEY
   The price was 5s.


                 [ORPHEUS: 1905]

Orpheus | a lyrical legend by | Aleister Crowley in two volumes of which |
this is volume
. one |
:     | each one crown | "Left." Society | for the | Propagation of |
. two |
 Religious | Truth | "Right." Boleskine | Foyers | Inverness | 1905.

   Printed in Red and Black.

Collation: -- Demy 8vo, pp. 156, consisting of Half-title; Title as above;
    Contents, pp. 7 - 9; Warning, pp. 11 - 14; Exordium, pp. 15 - 19; Half-
    title, Liber Primus vel Carminum, p. 21; Dedication "To Oscar Echenstein,"
    &c., p. 23; Quotations, p. 24; Text, pp. 25 - 106; Half-title, Liber
    Secundus vel Amoris, p. 107; Dedication "To Mary Beaton," &c., 109,
    Quotations, p. 110; Text, pp. 111 - 155; Printer's name, p. 156.
    Headlines throughout.

Volume ii. similarly arranged.  Dedications to "The Memory of Jhei Aour," &c.,
    and "To my Wife," p. 148.

Edition: 1 copy on Roman vellum, 500 copies on hand-made paper.

   Issued in white boards, linen backs, white label "ORPHEUS | I. (or II.") | Two volumes | Ten Shillings | Boards | CROWLEY.


                [COLLECTED WORKS]

The Works | of | Aleister Crowley | Volume I. | Foyers | Society for the Propagation of | Religious Truth | 1906 | ["All rights reserved"].

Collation: -- Extra crown.  In Three Volumes. Vol. I., pp. x + 269, consisting
    of Half-title; Title as above; Preface; Contents, pp. vii - ix; Text, pp.
    1 - 269; Vol. II., pp. viii + 283, consisting of Half-title; Title as
    above; Contents, v - vii; Text, pp. 1 - 283.  Vol. III., pp. vii + 230,
    consisting {239A} of Half-title; Title as above; Contents, pp. v - vii;
    Text, pp. 1 + 230.
      Appendices, half-title, and pp. 233 - 248.

Edition: 1 copy on vellum, 1000 copies on India paper.

   Issued in camel-hair paper cover; on front cover, in large white letters, "The Collected Works of Aleister Crowley."


                [GARGOYLES: 1906]

Gargoyles | being| Strangely Wrought Images | of Life and Death | by | Aleister Crowley | Foyers | Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth | 1906.

Collation: -- Pott 8vo, pp. vi + 113.  Half-title [reverse ' . ' Fifty copies
    only, &c., on the hand-made copies]; Title as above in red and black;
    Contents, pp. v, vi.

Prose Dedication ("To Lola Bentrovata") in red and black, pp. 1, 2, and Text,
    pp. 3 - 112; (presumably) Dedicatory Epilogue, p. 113, printed in red.
    Chiswick Press imprint, p. 114.

Edition: 2 copies on Roman vellum, 50 on hand-made paper numbered and signed,
    300 copies on machine-made paper.

   Issued in fascimile to "Songs of the Spirit."  No price, but sold at 3s.
    6d. net cash to the trade.


                [ROSA MUNDI: 1905]

Rosa Mundi | a poem | by | H. D. Carr | with an original composition by | Auguste Rodin | prix: vingt francs | price: sixteen shillings net | Paris: Ph-Renouard, rue des Saints Peres | London -- of H. D. Carr, care of E. Dennes, 22 Chancery Lane | and through all booksellers | 1905.

Collation: -- Foreign glazed paper, measuring 13" x 10" approximately.  Half-
    title, reverse "tirage;" 2 copies on vellum, 10 copies on China paper, 488
    copies on hand-made paper; Lithograph by Clot from A. Rodin, woman seated,
    her arms clasping her knees.  Title as above; Text, pp. 1 - 15; p. 17,
    printer's imprint; Edition as above.

   Issued in rose wrappers; front, Auguste Rodin | Rosa Mundi | H. D. Carr; reverse, design of curves.


{239B}  {full page follows}





                                  APPENDIX B

                           INDEX OF FIRST LINES TO

                            VOLUMES I., II., III.

                               {columns resume}


    ABOVE us on the mast is spread, ii. 108
    A brief consultation, ii. 227
    Accept me as I am! iii. 7
    A curious conflict this of love and fear, ii. 77
    Act II. Sc. i. adds little new to our thesis, ii. 188
    Act IV. develops the plot, ii. 189
    Adonis, awake, it is day; it is spring! iii. 114
    Adonis dies.  Imagination hears, iii. 122
    A faded skirt, a silken petticoat, ii. 52
    A faint sweet smell of ether haunts, iii. 9
    A fool indeed!  For why complain, iii. 2
    A foolish and a cruel thing is said, i. 182
    Again the unveiled goddess of delight, ii. 73
    Against the fiat of that God discrowned, ii. 64
    Age and despair, poverty and distress, iii. 112
    A good stout song, friend Argus, ii. 92
    Ah!  Christ ascends?  Ascension day? ii. 163
    Ah me! no fruit for guerdon, iii. 192
    Ah! ten days yet to Pentecost, ii. 163
    Ah! there be two sides to all shapes of truth, ii. 85
    Alas! that ever the dark place, iii. 201
    Ali bade Hassan to his house to sup, iii. 86
    Alice was desperately ill at morn, ii. 75
    A lion's mane, a leopard's skin, i. 129
    All day we chose each moment possible, ii. 70
    All night no change, no whisper, ii. 10
    Allow me to introduce myself, ii. 206
    All that we are from mind results, ii. 44
    All things are branded change, iii. 18
    "All things are good" exclaimed the boy, iii. 93
    All thought of work ins almost cast aside, ii. 66
    Al Malik the magnificent, iii. 86
    A lonely spirit seeks the midnight hour, i. 53
    Although I cannot leave these bitter leas, iii. 65
    Amata's path is Earnestness, ii. 46
    "Amat janua limen!" ["Closes book"]  Now, my friend, iii. 72
    Amid earth's motly, Gaia's cap and bells, 1. 250
    Amid the drowsy dream, ii. 61
    A miner laboured in a mine, iii. 90  {240A}
    Among the lilies of the sacred stream, i. 38
    And death in kissing.  How I have despised, i. 230
    And now (I'll quote you Scripture anyhow), ii. 176
    And though you claim Salvation sure, ii. 159
    And thus to-day that "Christ ascends," ii. 162
    And who is then the moon?  Bend close, iii. 13
    And you -- what are you doing here? i. 57
    Anemones grow in the wood by the stream, iii. 58
    An island of the mist, i. 102
    Another day rose of unceasing fire, ii. 70
    As, after long observation and careful study, i. 223
    As far as normal reasoning goes, ii. 173
    As for a quiet talk on physics, ii. 150
    Ashes and dust, i. 112
    As I one day to nature made lament, ii. 18
    As I pass in my flight, iii. 174
    As I sit in the sound, iii. 154
    As some lone mountebank of the stage, ii. 52
    As the tides invisible of ocean, iii. 131
    At last I met a maniac, ii. 165
    At last we arrive at the end, ii. 194
    At least your faith should be content, ii. 163
    At noon she sailed for home, ii. 84
    At Paris upon Dead Man's Day. iii. 102
    "At the hour of the great Initiation" ii. 231
    Aum!  I unfold the tinted robe, iii. 66
    Aum!  Let us meditate aright, ii. 177
    Aum!  Let us meditate aright, ii. 184
    Ay!  I would murder not my brother only, ii. 104
    Ay!  Let him rise and answer, ii. 159
    Ay!  There's a law!  For this recede, iii. 14

    BEFORE the altar of Famine and Desire, i. 181
    Before the darkness, earlier than being, i. 105
    Behold a virgin to the Lord, i. 83
    Behold, I am; a circle on whose hands, ii. 19  {240B}
    Bend down in dream the shadow-shape, ii. 128
    Beneath the living cross I lie, ii. 62
    Better than bliss of floral kiss, iii. 64
    Bitter reproaches passed between us, ii. 77
    Black Ares hath called, ii. 112
    Black thine abyss of noon, ii. 30
    Blind agony of thought!  Who turns his pen, iii. 118
    Blind Chesterton is sure to err, ii. 185
    Blind the iron pinnacles edge the twilight, i. 27
    Blood, mist, and foam, then darkness, i. 109
    Blow on the flame, ii. 7
    Brethren, what need of wonder, iii. 186
    Brutal refinement of deep-seated vice, iii. 123
    Buddham Saranangachami, ii. 259
    But first; I must insist on taking, ii. 149
    But if das Essen is das Nichts, ii. 171
    "But if," you cry, "the world's designed, ii 157
    But never mind!  Call them idolaters, ii. 156
    But now (you say) broad-minded folk, ii. 156.
    But, surely, (let me corner you!), ii. 180
    But then you argue, and with sense, ii. 180
    But thou, O Lord, O Apollo, ii. 35
    But to-night the lamp must be wasted, ii. 36
    But why revile, ii. 147
    By palm and pagoda enchaunted, ii. 121
    By Wisdom framed from ancient days, ii. 97

    CALL down that star whose tender eyes, i. 171
    Can you believe the deadly will's decree, i. 254
    Chaldean fools, who prayed to stars and fires, ii. 19
    Clear, deep, and blue, the sky, i. 49
    Cloistral seclusion of the galleried pines, iii. 119
    Clytie, beyond all praise, i. 120
    Coiled in the hollow of the rock they kiss, iii. 122
    Come back, come back, come back, Eyrydice! iii. 158
    Come, child of wonder, i. 167
    Come, love, and kiss my shoulders, i. 233
    Come over the water, love, to me, ii. 108
    Consummate beauty built of ugliness, iii. 123
    Could ivory blush with a stain of the sunset, iii. 67
    Crouched o'er the tripod, ii. 52
    Crowned with Eternity, beyond beginning, iii. 150

    DANCE a measure, iii. 87
    Darkness and daylight in divided measure, iii. 145
    Dark night, red night, i. 2
    Daughter of Glory, child, iii. 168
    Day startles the fawn, i. 90  {241A}
    Dead Pharoah's eyes from out the tomb, iii. 100
    Deep melancholy -- O, the child of folly, i. 183
    Dim goes the sun down there, ii. 33
    Divine Philosopher!  Dear Friend! i, 1
    Dora steals across the floor, iii. 59
    Droop the great eylids purple-veined! iii. 65

    EACH to his trade! live out your life, ii. 167
    Ecstasy, break through poetry's beautiful barriers, iii. 67
    Egg of the Slime!  Thy loose abortive lips, ii. 8
    Enough.  It is ended, the story, iii. 216
    Ere fades the last red glimmer of the sun, i. 116
    Ere the grape of joy is golden, i. 9
    Even as beasts, where the sepulchral ocean sobs, i. 178
    Even as the traitor's breath, i. 148
    Evoe!  Evoe Ho!  Iacche!  Iacche! iii. 203
    Exalted over earth, from hell arisen, i. 122
    Exile from human kind, i. 118
    Existence being sorrow, ii. 200
    Exquisite fairy, flower from stone begotten, iii. 118

    FAIRER than woman blushing at the kiss, i. 21
    Farewell, my book, ii. 8
    Farewell! O Light of day, i. 263
    First.  "Here's a johnny with a cancer, ii. 209
    First, here's philosophy's despair, ii. 166
    First word of my song, iii. 131
    Fivefold the shape sublime that lifts its head, iii. 150
    Fling down the foolish lyre, the witless power!  iii. 159
    Floating in the summer air, ii. 2
    For, at first, this practice leads, ii. 176
    Forged by God's fingers in His furnace, ii. 63
    For our God is as a fire, i. 68
    For the web of the battle is woven, i. 74
    Fraught with the glory of a dead despair, iii. 59
    Fresh breath from the woodland blows sweet, i. 117
    Fresh in the savage vigour of the time, iii. 117
    From darkness of fugitive thought, iii. 127
    From fourfold quarters, iii. 133
    From the abyss, the horrible lone world, 1, 200
    From youth and love to sorrow is one stride, iii. 116
    Full amber-breasted light of harvest-moon, 148
    Full is the joy of maidenhood made strong, iii. 147  {241B}

    GIANT,  with iron secrecies ennighted, iii. 122
    Glory and praise to thee, O Satan, ii. 18
    God, I have rowed! iii. 28
    God of the golden face and fiery forehead, ii. 22
    Gone to his Goddess! the poor worm's asleep, i. 239
    Good bends and breathes into the rosy shell, iii. 120
    Go to the woodlands, English maid, i. 7
    Great Liberator, come again, ii. 3
    Green and gold the meadows lie, i. 24

    HA!  HA!  In the storm I ride, ii. 136
    Hail, child of Semele! iii. 205
    Hail!  Hail!  Hail!  ii. 130
    Hail, O Dionysus!  Hail! iii. 203
    Hail, sweet my sister! hail, adulterous spouse, iii. 86
    Hail to Thee, Lady bright, i. 243
    Hail, Tyche!  From the Amalthean horn, iii. 120
    Hangs over me the fine false gold, ii. 127
    Ha! who invokes!  What horror rages, iii. 194
    He did not kiss me with his mouth, i. 100
    He's gone -- his belly filled enough, ii. 163
    He hath made His face as a fire, i. 89
    He is here!  He is here! iii. 206
    He is the equal of the gods, my queen, i. 250
    Hence I account no promise worse, ii. 156
    Here goes my arrow to the gold, ii. 154
    Here in the evening curl white mists, i. 118
    Here in the extreme west of all the earth, ii. 67
    Here, in the home of a friend, i. 154
    Here in the wild Caucasian night, i. 125
    Here is a man!  For all the world to see, iii. 110
    Here most philosophers agree, ii. 173
    Here, on the crimson strand of blood-red waters, i. 15
    Here's a test, ii. 179
    Here's how I got a better learning, ii. 164
    Here's just the chance you'd have, ii. 149
    Here, then, lives the pretty piece of goods, iii. 38
    Here we come to what in a way is the fundamental joke of these precepts,
        ii. 193
    Heroic helpmeet of the silent home! iii. 118
    Hers was the first sufficient sacrifice, ii. 52
    He who desires desires a change, iii. 87
    Holy as heaven, the home of winds, i. 95
    Horace, in the fruitful Sabine country, i. 127
    How barren is the Valley of Delight, i. 179
    How easy to excite derision, ii. 176
    How hardly a man, iii. 151
    How light and how agreeable, i. 156
    How sweet the soft looks shoot, ii. 78
    How tedious I always find, ii. 184
    How things are changed since Alice was so ill, ii. 81
    "How very hard it is to be," ii. 168
    "How you bungle!" growled Ganesha, ii. 228

    I ALMOST wonder if I ought, iii. 89
    I am a boy in this.  Alas! iii. 3
    I am a man,  Consider first, iii. 8
    I am a pretty advocate, iii, 6
    I am so sad, being alone to-night, iii. 66
    I behold in a mist of hair involving, iii. 58
    I bring ye wine from above, iii. 207
    Icarus cries: "My love is robed in light, iii. 120
    I come to tell you why I shun, ii. 169
    I could not let her leave me, ii. 82
    I do not feel myself inclined, ii. 173
    I draw no picture of the Fates, iii. 22
    I drew a hideous talisman of lust, ii. 66
    I feel thee shudder, clinging to my arm, i. 119
    I find some folks think me (for one), ii. 177
    I flung out of chapel and church, ii. 144
    If you please sir, a gentleman has called, i. 60
    I had a fearful dream, ii. 73
    I have no heart to sing, ii. 68
    I hear the waters faint and far, ii. 106
    I killed my wife -- not meaning to, indeed, i. 182
    I kissed the face of Flavia fair, iii. 60
    I know.  When Ramoth-Gilead's field, i. 131
    I lay within the forest's virgin womb, ii. 32
    I looked beneath her eyelids, i. 98
    I learnt at last some sort of confidence, ii. 68
    I lie in liquid moonlight, ii. 34
    I love you.  That seems simple?  No! iii. 6
    I met a Christian clergyman, ii. 149
    I moved.  Remote from fear and pain, iii. 105
    Impossible that we shall ever part, ii. 82
    I must be ready for my friend to-night, ii. 37
    In Act III. we have another illustration, ii. 188
    In all the skies the planets and the stars, ii. 53
    In Ares' grove, the sworded trees, ii. 90
    In Asia, no the nysian plains, she played, iii. 190
    In child-like meditative mood, iii. 165
    In Life what hope is always unto men, ii. 65
    In middle music of Apollo's corn. i. 193
    In my distress I made complain to Death, i. 181
    In mystic dolour wrapt, the ascetic turns, iii. 121  {242B}
    Infinite delicacy in great strength, iii. 118
    In presenting this theory of the Universe, ii. 233
    In response to many suggestions, ii. 3
    In such a conflict I stand neuter, ii. 183
    In the Beginning God began, i. 251
    In the blind hour of madness, i. 64
    In the brave old days, i. 82
    In the days of the spring of my being, iii. 129
    In the dim porchway, ii. 69
    In the fevered days and nights, ii. 195
    In the grim woods, i. 36
    In the heather deeply hidden, iii. 136
    In the hospital bed she lay, ii. 1
    In the night my passion fancies, i. 175
    In the sorrow of the silence of the sunset, ii. 25
    In the spring, in the loud lost places, iii. 211
    In the storm that divides the wild night, i. 48
    In the ways of the North and the South, i. 144
    Into the inmost agony of things, iii. 115
    In vain I sit by Kandy Lake, iii. 21
    I, of the Moderns, have let alone Greek, ii. 145
    I practice then, with conscious power, ii. 179
    I saw in a trance or a vision, ii. 53
    I saw the Russian peasants build a ring, i. 180
    I scorn the thousand subtle points, ii. 151
    I see the centuries wax and wane, i. 207
    I shall not tell thee that I love thee, i. 222
    Isis am I, and from my life are fed, i. 228
    Isis am I, and from my life are fed, i. 262
    Is it your glance that told me?  Nay, iii. 2
    Is love indeed eternal? ii. 85
    Is there a soul behind the mask? iii. 6
    I stole her money, even then to prove, ii. 84
    I stood within Death's gate, i. 202
    It has often been pointed out, ii. 58
    I think, Sir, that I have you still, ii. 157
    I think the souls of many men are here, i. 44
    It is a commonplace of scientific men that metaphysics is mostly
        moonshine, ii. 258
    It is a lamentable circumstance, ii. 185
    It is fitting that I, Ambrose, ii. 212
    It is loftily amusing to the student, ii. 203
    It is summer and sun on the sea, i. 177
    It is the seasonable sun of spring, i. 202
    It matters little whether we, ii. 170
    It may be that pure Nought will fail, ii. 177
    It may possibly be objected by the censorious, ii. 189
    It really seemed as if fate was against him, ii. 228
    It shall be said, when all is done, iii. 113
    It should be clearly understood, ii. 254
    It thank you, M. Davenport!  iii. 26  {243A}
    I took another way to shield my love, ii. 65
    I took three Hottentots alive, ii. 102
    It's rather hard, isn't it, sir, ii. 145
    It was impossible that she should come, ii. 74
    I've talked too long: you're very good, ii. 183
    I was a fool to hide it, iii. 8
    I was most weary of my work, ii. 67
    I was so hopeless that I turned away, ii. 65
    I will not, and you will not.  Stay! iii. 12
    I will not bring abuse to point my pen, ii. 5
    I will not now invite attack, ii. 151
    I will not shake thy hand, old man, ii. 1
    I will not waste my own time and that of my readers, ii. 254

    JEHJAOUR was a mighty magician, ii. 226
    Just and the fletcher shapes his shaft, ii. 46

    KHEPHRA, thou Beetle-headed God, iii. 17
    Kiss me, O sister, kiss me down to death! iii. 121
    Know ye my children?  From the old strong breast, iii. 149

    LADY, awake the dread abyss, iii. 15
    Last night -- but the boy shrieked, ii. 71
    Lay them together for the sake of Love, i. 37
    Let me give a rapid resume of what we have gone through, ii. 260
    Let me help Babu Chander Grish up, ii. 148
    Let me pass out beyond the city gate, i. 30
    Let no ill memory of an ancient wrong, i. 71
    Let the far music of oblivious years, iii. 161
    Let us first destroy the argument of fools, ii. 153
    'Leven o' th' clock!  Plague take these lovers! iii. 68
    Libertine touches of small fingers, i. 208
    Lie still, O love, and let there be delight, iii. 64
    Life hidden in death, iii. 144
    Lift up thine eyes! for night is shed around, i. 90
    Lift up thine head, disastrous Jezebel, i. 180
    Lift up this love of peace and bliss, ii. 110
    Light in the sky, i. 242
    Light shed from seaward over breakers, ii. 105
    Like leaves that fall before the sullen wind, i. 129
    Like memories of love they come, iii. 96
    Like pensive cattle couched upon the sand, ii. 16
    Like snows on the mountain, i. 55
    Linked in the tiny shelf upon the ship, ii. 77
    Listen!  The venerable monk pursued, iii. 104  {243B}
    "Listen to the Jataka!" said the Buddha, ii. 225
    Lo! in the interstellar space of night, iii. 155
    Long days and nights succeeded in despair, i. 16
    Look now it leaps towards the leaper's curl, iii. 119
    Love comes to flit, a spark of steel, iii. 113
    Lured by the loud big-breasted courtesan, ii. 36
    Lust, impotence, and knowledge of thy soul, i. 116

    MAKE me a roseleaf with your mouth, iii. 4
    Man's days are dim, his deeds are dust, i. 8
    Mary, Mary, subtle and softly breathing, iii. 61
    May I who know so bitterly the tedium of this truly dreadful poem, iii.
        126
    Mere terror struck into our souls, ii. 81
    Mightiest Self!  Supreme in Self-Contentment, ii. 23
    Mild glimpses of the quiet moon, iii. 146
    Mistress and maiden and mother, ii. 29
    Mistress, I pray thee, when the wind, i. 184
    Moreover (just a word) this chance, iii. 18
    Mortal distrust of mortal happiness, i. 182
    Mortals are not for nectar all the time, ii. 80
    Mortals never learn from stories, i. 156
    My beauty in thy deep pure love, i. 108
    My comedy has changed its blithe aspect, ii. 74
    My dreams are sweet, i. 14
    My head is split.  The crashing axe, iii. 85
    My heavy hair upon my olive skin, i. 6
    My home is set between two ivory towers, ii. 2
    My little lady light o' limb, iii. 116
    My soul is aching with the sense of sound, i. 113

    NAKED as dawn, the purpose of the hour, i. 157
    Nathless she locked her cabin door, ii. 78
    Nay, ere ye pass your people pass, ii. 35
    "Nay! that were nothing," say you now, iii. 11
    Night brings madness, i. 173
    Night, like a devil, with lidless eyes, iii. 90
    Night the voluptuous, night the chaste, iii. 88
    Nine times I kissed my love in her sleep, i. 183
    Nine voices that raise high the eternal hymn, i. 215
    No higher?  No higher? iii. 24
    No! on the other hand the Buddha, ii. 147
    No passion stirs the cool white throat of her, i. 168
    Norah, my wee shy child of wonderment, iii. 61
    Nor can I see what sort of gain, ii. 172
    North, by the ice-belt, i. 93  {244A}
    Not a word to introduce my introduction, ii. 141
    Note from this day no possible event, ii. 81
    Not winged forms, nor powers of air, i. 74
    Now (higher on the Human Ladder), ii. 210
    Now is our sin requited of the Lord, i. 66
    Now is the gold gone of the year, iii. 188
    Now on the land the woods are green, i. 120
    Now the great elephant strode with lordly footsteps in the forest, ii. 227
    Now the road widens and grows darker still, iii. 180
    Now, when the sun falls in the dismal sky, ii. 85
    Now your grave eyes are filled with tears, iii. 11

    O BLUEBELL of the inmost wood, iii. 14
    O body pale and beautiful with sin, i. 117
    O chainless Love, the frost is in my brain, i. 109
    O coiled and constricted and chosen, ii. 96
    O crimson cheeks of love's fierce fever, i. 171
    Of course I might have know it was a lie, ii.74
    O friends and brothers, ii. 127
    O good St. Patrick, turn again, ii. 48
    O Gretchen, when the morn is gray, i. 243
    O happy of mortals, ii. 103
    Oh! I had such a bad dream, i. 58
    "Oh, very well!" I think you say, ii. 160
    O if these words were sword, i. 167
    O iron, bow to silver's piercing note! iii. 183
    O kissable Tarshitering! the wild bird calls its mate -- and I? iii. 87
    O Lesbian maiden, ii. 6
    O light in Light! O flashing wings of fire! iii. 199
    O light of Apollo! iii. 200
    O Lord our God, i. 24
    O love! and were I with thee ever! iii. 3
    O Love!  Pure mystery of life, i. 247
    O lover, I am lonely here, ii. 109
    O Man of Sorrows: brother unto Grief, i. 207
    O master of the ring of love, i. 179
    O mortal, tossed on life's unceasing ocean, ii. 107
    O Mother of Love, i. 17
    One day from landing, ii. 80
    One way sets free, ii. 53
    On his couch Imperial Alpin, i. 101
    O Night! the very mother of us all, i. 34
    On rocky mountain bare, i. 43
    O Rose of dawn!  O star of evening! iii. 39
    O rosy star, i. 22  {244B}
    O Self Divine!  O Living Lord of Me. ii. 20
    O sleep of lazy love, be near, ii. 115
    O tearless sorrow of long years, ii. 82
    O the deep wells and springs of tears! iii. 63
    O the gloom of these distasteful tomes, iii. 25
    O there is edged the waning moon, iii. 36
    O the time of dule and teen, i. 87
    O thou, of Angels fairest and most wise, ii. 15
    O triple form of darkness!  Sombre splendour! iii. 177
    Our hair deep laden with the scent of earth, iii. 141
    Our love takes on a tinge of melancholy, ii. 84
    Out of the seething cauldron of my woes, i. 202
    Out of the waters of the sea, i. 79
    Over a sea like stained glass, ii. 111
    Over the western water lies a solar fire, i. 214
    O virgin!  O my sister!  Hear me, death! iii. 102
    O voice of sightless magic, i. 103
    O what pale thoughts like gum exude, iii. 12
    O who shall overcome this earth, ii. 47
    O world of moonlight, i. 205

    PALE vapours lie like phantoms on the sea, i. 122
    Paolo ignites, Francesca is consumed, iii. 120
    Perfectly sad and perfectly resolved, iii. 114
    Peintre, que ton amour inspire, i. 129
    Pilgrim of the sun, be this thy script, ii. 121
    Poor child, poor child, how are you? i. 62
    Pray do not ask me where I stand, ii. 146

    QUITE careless whether golden gales, ii. 76

    RAIN, rain in May.  The river sadly flows, i. 116
    Recall, my soul, the sight we twain have looked upon, ii. 17
    Red is the angry sunset, ii. 5
    Rest, like a star at sea, i. 45
    Roll, strong life-current of these very veins, iii. 171
    Roll through the caverns of matter, i. 211
    Rose of the World! iii. 51
    Rose of the world!  Ay, love, in that warm hour, iii. 91
    Rose on the breast of the world of spring, iii. 64

    SACRED, between the serpent fangs of pain, i. 199
    1. Sakkaya-di"tt"hi.  Belief in a "soul," ii. 249  {245A}
    "Scepticus."  Well, my dear Babu, I trust you have slept well, ii. 267
    Second, your facts are neatly put, ii. 210
    Seed of Abel, eat, drink, sleep, ii. 15
    Self-damned, the leprous moisture of thy veins sickens the sunshine, i.
        115
    Senseless the eyes: the brow bereft of sense, iii. 122
    Shall beauty avail thee, Carytid, crouched, iii. 112
    She dared not come into my room to-night, ii. 73
    She grew most fearful, ii 73
    She lay within the water, i. 7
    She sits and screams above the folk of peace, iii. 119
    She was more graceful than the royal palm, ii. 65
    Show by thy magic art, iii. 168
    Sibyl says nothing -- she's a Sphinx! iii. 19
    Sidonia the Sorceress!  I revel in her amber skin, i. 178
    Sing, happy nightingale, sing, i. 124
    Sing, little bird, it is dawn, i. 14
    Six days.  Creation took no longer, i. 226
    Sleep, O deep splendour of disastrous years, ii. 82
    Slow wheels of unbegotten hate, i. 145
    Small coffin-worms that burrow in thy brain, ii. 8
    Snow-hills and streams, dew-diamonded, i. 14
    So faded all the dream, iii. 169
    So far at least.  I must concede, ii. 181
    So far my pen has touched with vivid truth, iii. 46
    So fearful is the wrath divine, ii. 120
    So have the leaves departed, i. 127
    So here is my tribute -- a jolly good strong 'un, ii. 168
    So, love, not thus for your and me! iii. 13
    Some lives complain of their own happiness, i. 194
    Some sins assume a garb so fine and white, i. 132
    Sometimes I think my blood in waves appears, ii. 18
    Some years ago I thought to try, ii. 178
    So much when philosophy's lacteal river, ii. 168
    So not one word derogatory, ii. 152
    So now the Earl was well a-weary, ii. 49
    Sophie!  I loved her, tenderly at worst, i. 194
    (1) Sorrow. -- Existence is Sorrow, ii. 245
    So since in England Christ still stands, ii. 147  {245B}
    So, with permission, let us be, ii. 151
    Speak, O my sister, O my spouse, speak, iii. 64
    Spell-bound we sat: the vivid violin, iii. 123
    Spirit of the Gods!  O single, i. 152
    Still grave, my budding Arahat? iii. 8
    Substantial, stern, and strong, iii. 182
    Surely, my God, now I am left alone, i. 78
    Surely the secret whisper of sweet life, iii. 113
    Sweet are the swift hard struggles, ii. 79
    Sweet, do you scold?  I had rather have you scold, iii. 62
    Sweet, sweet are May and June, dear, i. 230
    Swift and subtle and thin are the arrows of Art, iii. 112
    Syrinx is caught upon the Arcadian field, iii. 119

    TAKE Oscar Eckenstein -- he climbs, ii. 210
    Tender the phrase, and faint the melody, i. 249
    Tender the smile, and faint the lover's sigh, i. 249
    Terror, and darkness, and horrid despair, ii. 1
    That which is highest as the deep, i. 34
    The ashen sky, too sick for sleep, ii. 12
    The conqueror rides at last, i. 85
    The constant ripple of your long white hands, i. 113
    The crown of Gods and mortals within, ii. 141
    The essential features of Buddhism, ii. 244
    The eternal spring is in the heart of youth, iii. 116
    The Evolution of things is thus described by the Qabalists, i. 265
    The figure of the Marquis of Glenstrae, iii. 38
    The foolish bells with their discordant clang, i. 202
    The fragrant gateways of the dawn, i. 204
    The frosty fingers of the wind, iii. 62
    The ghosts of abject days flit by, i. 211
    The Hand.  From mystery that is cloud, control, iii. 115
    The heart of a man as the sea, i. 68
    The hearts of Greeks with sharper flames, ii. 109
    The heavy hand is held, iii. 143
    The incense steams before the Christ, i. 52
    The inexpiable fate whose shuddering wing, ii. 78
    The Khing-Ghost is abroad.  His spectre legions, iii. 107
    The king was silent, i. 186
    The keystone of this arch of misery, i. 164
    The large pale limbs of the earth, i. 68
    The law of causation is formally identical with this, ii. 249  {246A}
    The life, by angels; touch divinely lifted, i. 31
    The life to live?  The thought to think, ii. 144
    The light streams stronger through the lamps of sense, iii. 95
    The little money that we had to spend, ii. 83
    The magical task and the labour is ended, iii. 200
    The Meeting-House of the Brethren Gathered Together To The Name Of The
        Lord Jesus, iii. 46
    The mere result of all this was a dream, ii. 67
    The metaphysics of these verses, ii. 170
    The mighty sound of forests, i. 51
    The mind with visions clouded, i. 50
    The moon spans Heaven's architrave, ii. 63
    The night is void of stars: the moon is full, iii. 62
    The "Nineteenth Mahakalpa" brought out its April Number, ii. 230
    Then let no memory shrink abashed, iii. 10
    Then one-third of all humanity are steady, ii. 156
    The note of the silence is changed, iii. 15
    The old sun rolls; the old earth spins, iii. 111
    The physiologist reproaches, ii. 209
    The poet slept.  His fingers twine, iii. 89
    The polished silver flings me back, ii. 121
    The premiss major.  Life at best, ii. 171
    The premiss minor.  I deplore, ii. 176
    The prophecies are spoken in vain, ii. 81
    The purpose of this essay, ii. 244
    Therefore I burnt the wicked pantacle, ii. 66
    Therefore poor Crowley lights his pipe, ii. 210
    There is a bare black headland which the sea, i. 46
    There is a lake amid the snows, ii. 174
    There is an eye through which the Kabbalist, iii. 17
    There is an idol in my house, iii. 97
    There is a sense of passion after death, i. 182
    There is much sorcery in the word eleven, ii. 68
    There is no hell but earth, ii. 53
    "There is only one more birth," he groaned, ii. 229
    There leapt upon a breach and laughed, iii. 101
    There was no secret cave, ii. 70
    The rose of the springtime that bended, ii. 72
    The roses of the world are sad, ii. 71
    The schoolboy drudges through his Greek, iii. 63
    The scorpion kisses and the stings of sin, i. 54
    The seas that lap the sand, i. 46  {246B}
    The Second Precept is directed against theft, ii. 193
    These portraits, darling, are they yours? iii. 10
    The serpent glimmered through the primal tree, iii. 121
    These strictures must include the liar, ii. 248
    The seven Wise Men of Martaban, iii. 103
    The ship to the breezes is bended, 1, 220
    The solemn hour, and the magnetic swoon, i. 180
    The sound of the hammer and steel, ii. 92
    The spears of the night at her onset, iii. 93
    The story as it runs is this, ii. 182
    The story of a fool, ii. 53
    The strange look of a woman of the town, ii. 19
    The sun of love shone through my love's deep eyes, ii. 9
    The sword is made sharp in our hands, i. 70
    The sword that was broken is perfect, iii. 58
    The Three Characteristics, ii. 246
    The third time bitterly came reason back, ii. 79
    The unutterable void of Hell is stirred, i. 185
    The valleys, that are splendid, i. 174
    The vault of purple that I strove, i. 29
    The veil o' th' mist of the quiet wood is lifted to the seer's gaze, iii.
        117
    The Virgin lies at Bethlehem, ii. 14
    The wail of the wind in the desolate land, i. 49
    The wandering waters move about the world, i. 96
    The wand of Hermes, the caduceus wonder-working, iii. 132
    The waterpot is broken at the well, iii. 121
    The waving surf shone from the Peaceful Sea, ii. 64
    The Winged Bull that dwelled in the north, ii. 33
    The woodland hollows know us, ii. 75
    The woods are very quiet, i. 36
    The world is borne upon thy breast, ii. 130
    The world is dusk, expectant of its doom, i. 47
    The world moves not, i. 32
    The worst of meals is that we have to meet, i. 181
    The young men are girded with swords, i. 72
    This forbids the taking life in any form, ii. 192
    This is my point; the world lies bleeding, ii. 157
    This meditation differs fundamentally from the usual Hindu methods, ii.
        252
    This precept, against adultery, ii. 193
    This prescription has been made up before, sir, iii. 44  {247A}
    This, then, is what I deem occurred, ii. 182
    This time she set her will against my will, ii. 75
    Those who are most familiar with the spirit of fair play which pervades
        our great public schools, iii. 219
    Thou fair Republic oversea afar, i. 136
    Thou knowest, O Love, ii. 83
    Thou Sun, whose swift desire to-day is dull, i. 39
    Through fields of foam ungarnered, i. 149
    Thus all conceptions fail and fall, ii. 172
    Thus, in Ascension, you and I, ii. 152
    Thy brazen forehead, and its lustre gloom i. 166
    To-day thrice halves the lunar week, ii. 164
    To die amid the blossoms of the frost, i. 135
    To love you, Love, is all my happiness, i. 181
    To-night I tread the unsubstantial way, i. 196
    To return from our little digression to the original plan of our essay,
        ii. 256
    To sea!  To sea!  The ship is trim, iii. 5
    Towards the mountains and the night, i. 89
    To what God should he appeal? ii. 226
    Truth, like old Gaul, is split in three, iii. 3
    Turn back from safety: in my love abide, i. 133
    "Truth, that's the gold!" ii. 144
    'Twas dark when church was out! iii. 60
    Twilight is over, i. 53

    ULYSSES 'scaped the sorceries of that queen, i. 121
    Under the stars the die was cast to win, iii. 65
    Under the summer leaves, ii. 7
    Unity uttermost showed, iii. 209
    Unto what likeness shall I liken thee, i. 114
    Unwilling as I am to sap the foundations, ii. 192
    Upheaved from Chaos, ii. 33
    Up, up, my bride!  Away to ride, iii. 56

    WAKE, fairy maid, for the day, i. 14
    Was it a sense of uttermost relief, ii. 83
    Was thy fault to be too tender, ii. 3
    Waters that weep upon the barren shore, ii. 26
    We fear indeed that in the trap, ii. 99
    We have forgotten all the days of fear, ii. 80
    We know what fools (only) call, ii. 169
    We lost a day!  Nor kisses, nor regret, ii. 78
    Well, but another way remains, ii. 155
    Well have I said, "O God, Thou art, i. 193
    Well, I am lost!  The whistle brings no hound, i. 259
    "M." Well, Scepticus, are your restored to health? ii. 262  {247B}
    We ride upon the fury of the blast, i. 47
    What ails thee, earth? ii. 31
    What change of language!  Ah, my dear, iii. 18
    What is my soul?  The shadow of my will, i. 194
    What makes God then of all the curses, ii. 17
    What power or fascination lie, i. 180
    What sadness closes in between, iii. 2
    What words are these that shudder through my sleep, i. 103
    When a battle is all but lost and won, ii. 270
    When, at the awful Judgment-day, God stands, iii. 115
    Whence the black lands shudder, ii. 55
    When God bethought Him, i. 10
    When God uplifted hands to smite, i. 82
    When I go to take Pansil, ii. 194
    When illegitimate criticism is met with a smart swing on the point of the
        jaw, iii. 109
    When I think of the hundreds of women, i. 195
    When the chill of earth black-breasted, ii. 283
    When the countenance fair, i. 76
    When the wearily falling blossom of midnight, iii. 67
    Where, in the coppice, oak and pine, i. 169
    Where was light when thy body came, ii. 9
    Whether we adopt Herbert Spencer's dictum, ii. 250
    Who art thou, love, by what sweet name I quicken? iii. 169
    Who is Love, that he should find me as I strive, i. 45
    Who is that slinkard moping down the street, iii. 99
    Who is this maiden robed for a bride, i. 237
    Why did you smile when the summer was dying, i. 113  {248A}
    Why is thy back made stiff, unrighteous priest, i. 141
    Will you not come: the unequal fever, iii. 4
    Will you not learn to separate, iii. 7
    Wild pennons of sunrise the splendid, i. 218
    With calm and philosophic mind, ii. 169
    With feet set terribly dancing, ii. 36
    Within the forest gloom, i. 15
    With this our "Christian" parents marred, i. 194
    Woe is me! the brow of a brazen morning, iii. 215
    Would God that I were dead, ii. 124

    YE rivers, and ye elemental caves, i. 197
    Yes! it's all so blessed and romantic, my dear, thank the Lord! iii. 46
    "Yes!" said Ganesha gloomily, ii. 226
    Yes, there are other phases, dear! iii. 9
    Yet by-and-by I hope to weave, ii. 146
    Yet ere the stars paled slowly in the east, ii. 79
    Yet God created (did he not?), ii. 158
    "You are sad!" the Knight said, ii. 140
    You are silent.  That we always were, iii. 2
    You buy my spirit with those peerless eyes, i. 132
    You do not well to swell the list, ii. 182
    You laughing little light of wickedness, iii. 114
    "You're a muddler and an idiot!" ii. 227
    You see I do not base my thesis, ii. 161
    You see, when I was young, they said, ii. 153
    You will not believe what I tell you? iii. 41
    You weary me with proof enough, ii. 178

    ZOHRA the king by feathered fans, ii. 38
    Zounds, man! have a care with thy goings, iii. 69

    {248B and end}

