THE WORKS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY    Vol. I, part 2 of 3   ASCII VERSION

File 2 of 3.


This work was originally published in two parallel columns.  Where such
columns are found in the original, they have been rendered as a single text
with "A" or "B" added to the page number at the end of each column: A = end
page left column.  B = end page right column.  On many pages a prefatory
paragraph or a concluding group of sentences is full across the page.  These
instances are noted in curly brackets.

Pages in the original are marked thus at the bottom:  {page number} or {page
number A} and {page number B}.
Comments and descriptions are also set off by curly brackets {}
Comments and notes not in the original are identified with the initials of the
source: e.g.  WEH note = Bill Heidrick note, etc.  Descriptions of
illustrations are not so identified, but are simply in curly brackets.

   Text Footnotes have been expanded at or near the point of citation within double angle brackets, e.g. <<footnote>>.  For poems, most longer footnotes are cited in the text to expanded form below the stanzas.


************************************************************************


                                  MYSTERIES:

                            LYRICAL AND DRAMATIC.

                                    1898.

{columns resume}

                THE FIVE KISSES.<<1>>

                        I.

                AFTER CONFESSION.

<<1. Crowley's biographer will note the astonishing coincidences of scene and incident between this poem and the events of 1903-4.>>

    DAY startles the fawn from the avenues deep that look to the east in the
        heart of the wood:
    Light touches the trees of the hill with its lips, and God is above them
        and sees they are good:
      Night flings from her forehead the purple-black hood.

    The thicket is sweet with the breath of the breeze made soft by the kisses
        of slumbering maids;
    The nymph and the satyr, the fair and the faulty alike are the guests of
        these amorous shades;
      The hour of Love flickers and falters and fades.

    O, listen, my love, to the song of the brook, its murmurs and cadences,
        trills and low chords;
    Hark to its silence, that prelude of wonder ringing at last like the
        clamour of swords
      That clash in the wrath of the warring of lords.

    Listen, oh, listen! the nightingale near us swoons a farewell to the
        blossoming brake;
    Listen, the thrush in the meadow is singing notes that move sinuous, lithe
        as a snake;
      The cushats are cooing, the world is awake. {90A}

    Only one hour since you whispered the story out of your heart to my
        tremulous ear;
    Only one hour since the light of your eyes was the victor of violent
        sorrow and fear;
      Your lips were so set to the lips of me here.

    Surely the victory ripens to perfect conquest of everything set in our
        way.
    We must be free as our hearts re, and gather strength for our limbs for
        the heat of the fray:
      The battle is ours if you say me not nay.

    Fly with me far, where the ocean is bounded white by the walls of the
        northernmost shore,
    Where on a lone rocky island a castle laughs in its pride at the billows
        that roar,
      My home where our love may have peace evermore.

    Yes, on one whisper the other is waiting patient to catch the low tone of
        delight.
    Kiss me again for the amorous answer; close your dear eyelids and think it
        is night,
      The hour of the even we fix for the flight.


                       II.

                   THE FLIGHT.

    LIFT up thine eyes! for night is shed around,
             As light profound,
    And visible as snow on steepled hills,
             Where silence fills
    The shaded hollows: night, a royal queen
             Most dimly seen {90B}
    Through silken curtains that bedeck the bed,
             Lift up thine head!
    For night is here, a dragon, to devour
             The slow sweet hour
    Filled with all smoke of incense, and the praise
             More loud than day's
    That swings its barren censer in the sky
             And asks to die
    Because the sea will hear no hollow moan
             Beyond its own,
    Because the sea that kissed dead Sappho<<1>> sings
             Of strange dark things --
<<1. Sappho, the great lyric poet of Greece, plunged from a rock into the sea, according to later tradition.>>
    Shapes of bright breasts that purple as the sun
             Grows dark and dun,
    Of pallid lips more haggard for the kiss
             Of Salmacis,<<1>>
<<1. A stream into which a man plunged, and was united, as a Hermaphrodite, with its attendant nymph.  The reference is connected with Sappho's loves.  See her Ode to Aphrodite and Swinburn's Anactoria and Hermaphroditus.>>
    Of eager eyes that startle for the fear
             Too dimly dear
    Lest there come death, like passion, and fulfil
             Their dreams of ill!
    Oh! lift thy forehead to the night's cool wind!
             The meekest hind
    That fears the noonday in her grove is bold
             To seek the gold
    So pale and perfect as the moon puts on:
             The light is gone.
    Hardly as yet one sees the crescent maid
             Move, half afraid,
    Into the swarthy forest of the air
             And breast made bare,
    Gather her limbs about her for the chase
             Through starry space,
    And, while the lilies sway their heads, to bend
             Her bow, to send {91A}
    A swift white arrow at some recreant star.
             The sea is far
    Dropped in the hollows of the swooning land.
             Oh! hold my hand!
    Lift up thy deep eyes to my face, and let
             Our lips forget
    The dumb dead hours before they met together!
             The snowbright weather
    Calls us beyond the grassy down, to be
             Beside the sea,
    The slowly-breathing ocean of the south.
             Oh, make thy mouth
    A rosy flame like that most perfect star
             Whose kisses are
    So red and ripe!  Oh, let thy limbs entwine
             Like love with mine!
    Oh, bend thy gracious body to my breast
             To sleep, to rest!
    But chiefly let thine eyes be set on me,
             As when the sea
    Lay like a mirror to reflect the shape
             Of yonder cape
    Where Sappho stood and touched the lips of death!
             Thy subtle breath
    Shall flow like incense in between our cheeks,
             Where pleasure seeks
    In vain a wiser happiness.  And so
             Our whispers low
    Shall dim the utmost beauty of thy gaze
             Through moveless days
    And long nights equable with tranced pleasure:
             So love at leisure
    Shall make his model of our clinging looks,
             And burn his books
    To write a new sweet volume deeper much,
             And frail to touch,
    Being the mirror of a gossamer
             Too soft and fair.
    This is the hour when all the world is sleeping;
             The winds are keeping
    A lulling music on the frosty sea.
             The air is free, {91B}
    As free as summer-time, to sound or cease:
             God's utmost peace
    Lies like a cloud upon the quiet land.
             O little hand!
    White hand with rose leaves shed about the tips,
             As if my lips
    Had left their bloom upon it when they kissed
             As if a mist
    Of God's delicious dawn had overspread
             Their face, and fled!
    O wonderful fresh blossom of the wood!
             O purpling blood!
    O azure veins as clear as all the skies!
             O longing eyes
    That look upon me fondly to beget
             Two faces, set
    Either like lowers upon their laughing blue,
             Where morning dew
    Sparkles with all the passion of the dawn!
             The happy lawn
    Leads, by the stillest avenues, to groves
             Made soft by loves;
    And all the nymphs have made a mossy dell
             Hard by the well
    Where even a Satyr might behold the grace
             Of such a face
    As his<<1>> who perished for his own delights,
             So well requites
<<1. Narcissus, a beautiful youth, inaccessible to love.  Echo, a nymph enamoured of him, died of neglect.  To punish him, Nemesis caused him to behold his image in a pool; he pined of love for the reflection, and was changed into the flower which still bears his name.>>
    That witching fountain his desire that looks.
             Two slow bright brooks
    Encircle it with silver, and the moon
             Strikes into tune
    The ripples as they break.  For here it was
             Their steps did pass,
    Dreamy Endymion's and Artemis',<<1>>
             Who bent to kiss
<<1. The reader may consult Keats's poem of "Endymion.">>
    Across the moss-grown rocks that build the well:
             And here they tell {92A}
    Of one<<1>> beneath the hoary stone who hid
             And watched unbid
<<1. A gentle sophistication of the story of Actaeon who beheld Artemis at the bath, and being changed into a stag, was torn to pieces by her hounds.>>
    When one most holy came across the glade,
             Who saw a maid
    So bright that mists were dim upon his eyes,
             And yet he spies
    So sweet a vision that his gentle breath
             Sighed into death:
    And others say that her the fairies bring
             The fairy king,<<1>>
<<1. From sophistication Crowley proceeds to pure invention.>>
    And crown him with a flower of eglantine,
             And of the vine
    Twist him a throne made perfect with wild roses,
             And gathered posies
    From all the streams that wander through the vale,
             And crying, "Hail!
    All hail, most beautiful of all our race!"
             Cover his face
    With blossoms gathered from a fairy tree
             Like foam from sea,
    So delicate that mortal eyes behold
             Ephemeral gold
    Flash, and not see a flower, but say the moon
             Has shone too soon
    Anxious to great Endymion; and this
             Most dainty kiss
    They cover him him withal, and Dian sees
             Through all the trees
    No pink pale blossom of his tender lips.
             The little ships
    Of silver leaf and briar-bloom sail here,
             No storm to fear,
    Though butterflies be all their mariners.
             The whitethroat stirs
    The beech-leaves to awake the tiny breeze
             That soothes the seas,
    And yet gives breath to shake their fairy sails;
             Young nightingales,
    Far through the golden plumage of the night,
             With strong delight {92B}
    Purple the evening with amazing song;
             The moonbeams throng
    In shining clusters to the fairy throat,
             Whose clear trills float
    And dive and run about the crystal deep
             As sweet as sleep.
    Only, fair love of this full heart of mine,
             There lacks the wine
    Our kisses might pour out for them; they wait,
             And we are late;
    Only, my flower of all the world, the thrush
             (You hear him?  Hush!)
    Lingers, and sings not to his fullest yet:
             Our love shall get
    Such woodland welcome as none ever had
             To make it glad.
    Come, it is time, cling closer to my hand.
             We understand.
    We must go forth together, not to part.
             O perfect heart!
    O little heart that beats to mine, away
             Before the day
    Ring out the tocsin for our flight!  My ship
             Is keen to dip
    Her plunging forehead in the silvering sea.
             To-morrow we
    Shall be so far away, and then to-morrow
             Shall shake off sorrow
    And be to-morrow and not change for ever:
             No dawn shall sever
    The sleepy eyelids of the night, no eve
             Shall fall and cleave
    The blue deep eyes of day.  Your hand, my queen!
             Look down and lean
    Your whole weight on me, then leap out, as light
             As swallow's flight,
    And race across the shadows of the moon,
             And keep the tune
    With ringing hoofs across the fiery way.
             Your eyes betray
    How eager is your heart, and yet -- O dare
             To fashion fair
    A whole long life of love!  Leap high, laugh low!
             I love you -- so! -- {93A)
    One kiss -- and then to freedom!  See the bay
             So far away,
    But not too far for love!  Ring out, sharp hoof,
             And put to proof
    The skill of him that steeled thee!  Freedom!  Set
             As never yet
    Thy straining sides for freedom!  Gallant mare!
             The frosty air
    Kindles the blood within us as we race.
             O love!  Thy face
    Flames with the passion of our happy speed!
             The noble steed
    Pashes the first gold limit of the sand.
             Ah love, thy hand!
    We win, no foot pursuing spans the brow!
             Yes, kiss me now!


                       III.

                THE SPRING AFTER.

    NORTH, by the ice-belt, where the cliffs appease
    Innumerable clamour of sundering seas,
    And garlands of ungatherable foam
    Wild as the horses maddening toward home,
    Where through the thunderous burden of the thaw
    Rings the sharp fury of the breaking flaw,
    Where summer's hand is heavy on the snow,
    And springtide bursts the insuperable floe,
    North, by the limit of the ocean, stands
    A castle, lord of those far footless hands
    That are the wall of that most monstrous world
    About whose pillars Behemoth is curled,
    About whose gates Leviathan is strong,
    Whose secret terror sweetens not for song.
    The hoarse loud roar of gulphs of raging brine
    That break in foam and fire on that divine
    Cliff-base, is smothered in the misty air,
    And no sound penetrates them, save a rare {93}
    Music of sombre motion, swaying slow.
    The sky above is one dark indigo
    Voiceless and deep, no light is hard within
    To shame love's lips and rouse the silky skin
    From its dull olive to a perfect white.
    For scarce an hour the golden rim of light
    Tinges the southward bergs; for scarce an hour
    The sun puts forth his seasonable flower,
    And only for a little while the wind
    Wakes at his coming, and beats cold and blind
    On the wild sea that struggles to release
    The hard grip from its throat, and lie at ease
    Lapped in the eternal summer.  But its waves
    Roam through the solitude of empty caves
    In vain; no faster wheels the moon above;
    And still reluctant fly the hours of love.
    It is so peaceful in the castle: here
    The night of winter never froze a tear
    On my love's cheek or mine; no sorrow came
    To track our vessel by its wake of flame
    Wherein the dolphin bathed his shining side;
    No smallest cloud between me and my bride
    Came like a little mist; one tender fear,
    Too sweet to speak of, closed the dying year
    With love more perfect, for its purple root
    Might blossom outward to the snowy fruit
    Whose bloom to-night lay sleeping on her breast,
    As if a touch might stir the sunny nest,
    Break the spell's power, and bid the spirit fly
    Who had come near to dwell with us.  But I
    Bend through long hours above the dear twin life,
    Look from love's guerdon to the lover-wife,
    And back again to that small face so sweet,
    And downwards to the little rosy feet,
    And see myself no longer in her eyes
    So perfectly as here, where passion lies
    Buried and re-arisen and complete.
    O happy life too sweet, too perfect sweet,
    O happy love too perfectly made one
    Not to arouse the envy of the sun {94A}
    Who sulks six months<<1>> for spite of it!  O love,
<<1. In Arctic latitudes the sun hardly rises at all from September to March, and is only visible in the south.>>
    Too pure and fond for those pale gods above,
    Too perfect for their iron rods to break,
    Arise, awake, and die for death's own sake!
    That one forgetfulness may take us three,
    Still three, still one, to the Lethean sea;
    That all its waters may be sweet as those
    We wandered by, sweet sisters of the rose,
    That perfect night before we fled, we two
    Who were so silent down that avenue
    Grown golden with the moonlight, who should be
    No longer two, but one; nor one, but three.
    And now it is the spiring; the ice is breaking;
    The waters roar; the winds their wings are shaking
    To sweep upon the northland; we shall sail
    Under the summer perfume of the gale
    To some old valley where the altars steam
    Before the gods, and where the maidens dream
    Their little lives away, and where the trees
    Shake laughing tresses at the rising breeze,
    And where the wells of water lie profound,
    And not unfrequent is the silver sound
    Of shepherds tuneful as the leaves are green,
    Whose reedy music echoes, clear and clean,
    From rocky palaces where gnomes delight
    To sport all springtime, where the brooding night
    With cataract is musical, and thrushes
    Throb their young love beside the stream that rushes
    Headlong to beat its foamheads into snow,
    Where the sad swallow calls, and pale songs flow
    To match the music of the nightingale.
    There, where the pulses of the summer fail,
    The fiery flakes of autumn fall, and there
    Some warm perfection of the lazy air
    Swims through the purpling veins of lovers.  Hark!
    A faint bird's note, as if a silver spark {94B}
    Struck from a diamond; listen, wife, and know
    How perfectly I love to watch you so.
    Wake, lover, wake, but stir not yet the child:
    Wake, and thy brow serene and low and mild
    Shall take my kisses, and my lips shall seek
    The pallid roses on thy perfect cheek,
    And kiss them into poppies, and thy mouth
    Shall lastly close to mine, as in the south
    We see the sun close fast upon the sea;
    So, my own heart, thy mouth must close on me.
    Art thou awake?  Those eyes of wondering love,
    Sweet as the dawn and softer than the dove,
    Seek no quick vision -- yet they move to me
    And, slowly, to the child.  How still are we!
    Yes, and a smile betokens that they wake
    Or dream a waking dream for kisses' sake;
    Yes, I will touch thee, O my low sweet brow!
    My wife, thy lips to mine -- yes, kiss me now!


                       IV.

              THE VOYAGE SOUTHWARD.

             HOLY as heaven, the home
             Of winds, the land of foam,
    The palace of the waves, the house of rain,
             Deeper than ocean, dark
             As dawn before the lark
    Flings his sharp song to skyward, and is fain
             To light his lampless eyes
             At the flower-folded skies
    Where stars are hidden in the blue, to fill
             His beak with star-dropt dew,
             His little heart anew
    With love an song to swell it to his will;
             Holy as heaven, the place
             Before the golden face {95A}
    Of God is very silent at the dawn.
             The even keel is keen
             To flash the waves between,
    But no soft moving current is withdrawn:
             We float upon the blue
             Like sunlight specks in dew,
    And like the moonlight on the lake we lie:
             The northern gates are past,
             And, following fair and fast,
    The north wind drove us under such a sky,
             Faint with the sun's desire,
             And clad in fair attire
    Of many driving cloudlets; and we flew
             Like swallows to the South.
             The ocean's curving mouth
    Smiled day by day and nights of starry blue;
             Nights when the sea would shake
             Like sunlight where the wake
    Was wonderful with flakes of living things
             That leapt for joy to feel
             The cold exultant keel
    Flash, and the white ship dip her woven wings;
             Nights when the moon would hold
             Her lamp of whitest gold
    To see us on the poop together set
             With one desire, to be
             Alone upon the sea
    And touch soft hands, and hold white bosoms yet,
             And see in silent eyes
             More stars than all the skies
    Together hold within their limits gray,
             To watch the red lips move
             For slow delight of love
    Till the moon sigh and sink, and yield her sway
             Unto the eastern lord
             That draws a sanguine sword
    And starts up eager in the dawn, to see
             Bright eyes grow dim for sleep,
             And lazy bosoms keep
    Their slumber perfect and their sorcery,
             While dawny winds arise,
             And fast the white ship flies {95B}
    To those young groves of olive by the shore,
             The spring-clad shore we seek
             That slopes to yonder peak
    Snow-clad, bright-gleaming, as the silver ore
             Plucked<<1>> by pale fingers slow
             In balmy Mexico,
    A king on thunder throned, his diadem
             The ruby rocks that flash
             The sunlight like a lash
    When sunlight touches, and sweeps over them
             A crown of light!  Behold!
             The white seas touch the gold,
    And flame like flowers of fire about the prow.
             It is the hour for sleep: --
             Lulled by the moveless deep
    To sleep, sweet wife, to sleep!  Yes, kiss me now!

<<1. Referring to the story of the accidental discovery of the mine of Potosi by a man who, plucking of a plant, found its roots shining with silver.>>


                        V.

              THE ULTIMATE VOYAGE.<<1>>

<<1. The Spiritual Journey towards the Supreme Knowledge which is life and bliss.>>

    THE wandering waters move about the world,
    And lap the sand, with quietest complaint
    Borne on the wings of dying breezes up,
    To where we make toward the wooded top
    Of yonder menacing hill.  The night is fallen
    Starless and moonless, black beyond belief,
    Tremendous, only just the ripple keeps
    Our souls from perishing in the inane,
    With music borrowed from the soul of God.
    We twain go thither, knowing no desire
    To lead us; but some strong necessity
    Urges, as lightning thunder, our slow steps
    Upward.  For on the pleasant meadow-land
    That slopes to sunny bays, and limpid seas
    (That breathe like maidens sleeping, for their breast
    Is silver with the sand that lies below,)
    Where our storm-strengthened dragon rests at last, {96A}
    And by whose borders we have made a home,
    More like a squirrel's bower than a house.
    For in this blue Sicilian summertime
    The trees arch tenderly for lovers' sleep,
    And all the interwoven leaves are fine
    To freshen us with dewdrops at the dawn,
    Or let the summer shower sing through to us,
    And welcome kisses of the silver rain
    That raps and rustles in the solitude.
    But in the night there came to us a cry:
    "The mountains are your portion, and the hills
    Your temple, and you are chosen."  Then I woke
    Pondering, and my lover woke and said:
    "I heard a voice of one majestical
    With waving beard, most ancient, beautiful,
    Concealed and not concealed;<<Macroprosopus.>> and awoke,
    Feeling a stronger compulsion on my soul
    To go some whither."  And the dreams were one
    (We somehow knew), and, looking such a kiss
    As lovers' eyes can interchange, our lips
    Met in the mute agreement to obey.
    So, girding on our raiment, as to pass
    Some whither of long doubtful journeying,
    We went forth blindly to the horrible
    Damp darkness of the pines above.  And there
    Strange beasts crossed path of ours, such beasts as earth
    Bears not, distorted, tortured, loathable,
    Mouthing with hateful lips some recent blood,
    or snarling at our feet.  But these attacked
    No courage of our hearts, we faltered not,
    And they fell back, snake's mouth and leopard's throat,
    Afraid.  But others fawning came behind
    With clumsy leapings as in friendliness,
    Dogs with men's faces, and we beat them off
    With scabbard, and the hideous path wound on.
    And these perplexed our goings, for no light
    Gleamed through the bare pine-ruins lava-struck, {96B}
    Nor even the hellish fire of Etna's maw.
    But lucklessly we came upon a pool
    Dank, dark, and stagnant, evil to the touch,
    Oozing towards us, but sucked suddenly,
    Silently, horribly, by slow compulsion
    Into the slipping sand, and vanishing,
    Whereon we saw a little boat appear,
    And in it such a figure as we knew
    Was Death.  But she, intolerant of delay,
    Hailed him.  The vessel floated to our feet,
    And Death was not.  She leapt within, and bent
    Her own white shoulders to the thwart, and bade
    Me steer, and keep stern watch with sword unsheathed
    For fear of something that her soul had seen
    Above.  And thus upon the oily black
    Silent swift river we sailed out to reach
    Its source, no longer feeling as compelled,
    But led by some incomprehensible
    Passion.  And here lewd fishes snapped at us,
    And watersnakes writhed silently toward
    Our craft.  But these I fought against, and smote
    head from foul body, to our further ill,
    For frightful jelly-monsters grew apace,
    And all the water grew one slimy mass
    Of crawling tentacles.  My sword was swift
    That slashed and slew them, chiefly to protect
    The toiling woman, and assure our path
    Through this foul hell.  And now the very air
    Is thick with cold wet horrors.  With my sword
    Trenchant, that tore their scaly essences --
    Like Lucian's sailor writhing in the clutch
    Of those witch-vines -- I slashed about like light,
    And noises horrible of death devoured
    The hateful suction of their clinging arms
    And wash of slipping bellies.  Presently
    Sense failed, and -- Nothing!
                             By-and-by we woke
    In a most beautiful canoe of pearl
    Lucent on lucent water, in a sun {97A}
    That was the heart of spring.  But the green land
    Seemed distant, with a sense of aery height;
    As if it were below us far, that seemed
    Around.  And as we gazed the water grew
    Ethereal, thin, most delicately hued,
    Misty, as if its substance were dissolved
    In some more subtle element.  We heard
    "O passers over water, do ye dare
    To tread the deadlier kingdoms of the air?"
    Whereat I cried: Arise!  And then the pearl
    Budded with nautilius-wings, and upward now
    Soared.  And our souls began to know the death
    That was about to take us.  All our veins
    Boiled with tumultuous and bursting blood;
    Our flesh broke bounds, and all our bones grew fierce,
    As if some poison ate us up.  And lo!
    The air is peopled with a devil-tribe
    Born of our own selves.  These, grown furious
    At dispossession by the subtle air,
    Contend with us, who know the agony
    Of half life drawn out lingering, who groan
    Eaten as if by worms, who dash ourselves
    Vainly against the ethereal essences
    That make our boat, who vainly strive to cast
    Our stricken bodies over the pale edge
    And drop and end it all.  No nerve obeys;
    But in the torn web of our brains is born
    The knowledge that release is higher yet.
    So, lightened of the devils that possessed
    In myriad hideousness our earthier lives,
    With one swift impulse, we ourselves shake off
    The clinging fiends, and shaking even the boat
    As dust beneath our feet, leap up and run
    Upward, and flash, and suddenly sigh back
    Happy, and rest with limbs entwined at last
    On pale blue air, the empyreal floor,
    As on a bank of flowers in the old days
    Before this journey.  So I think we slept.
    But now, awaking, suddenly we feel
    A sound as if within us, and without,
    So penetrating and so self-inspired {97B}
    Sounded the voice we knew as God's.  The words
    Were not a question any more, but said:
    "The last and greatest is within you now."
    Then fire too subtle and omniscient
    Devoured our substance, and we moved again
    Not down, not up, but inwards mystically
    Involving self in self, and light in light.
    And this was not a pain, but peaceable
    Like young-eyed love, reviving; it consumed
    And consecrated and made savour sweet
    To our changed senses.  And the dual self
    Of love grew less distinct and I began
    To feel her heart in mine, her lips in mine. ...
    Then mistier grew the sense of God without,
    And God was I, and nothing might exist,
    Subsist, or be at all, outside of Me,
    Myself Existence of Existences.
          .     .     .     .     .
    We had passed unknowing to the woody crown
    Of the little hill.  There was a secret Vault.
    We entered.  All without the walls appeared
    As fire, and all within as icy light;
    The altar was of gold, and on it burnt
    Some ancient perfume.  Then I saw myself
    And her together, as a priest, whose robe
    Was white and frail, and covered with a cope
    Of scarlet bound with gold: upon the head
    A golden crown, wherein a diamond shone;
    Within which diamond we beheld our self
    The higher priest, not clothed, but clothed upon
    With the white brilliance of high nakedness
    As with a garment.<<1>>  Then of our self there came
    A voice: "Ye have attained to That which Is;
    Kiss, and the vision is fulfilled."  And so
    Our bodies met, and, meeting did not touch
    But interpenetrated in the kiss
          .     .     .     .     .
<<1. See the Description of the robes and crown of the Magus in the"Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage.">>

    This writing is engraved on lamina
    Of silver, found by me, the trusted friend {98A}
    And loving servant of my lady and lord,
    In that abandoned Vault, of late destroyed
    By Etna's fury.  Nothing else remained
    (Save in the ante-room the sword we knew
    So often flashing at the column-head)
    Within.  I think my lord has written this.
    Now for the child, whose rearing is my care,
    And in whose life is left my single hope,
    This writing shall conclude the book of song
    His father made in worship and true love
    Of his fair lady, and these songs shall be
    His hope, and his tradition, and his pride.
    Thus have I written for the sake of truth,
    And for his sake who bears his father's sword --
    I pray God under my fond guardianship
    As worthily.  Thus far, and so -- the end.


            THE HONOURABLE ADULTERERS

                        I.

    I LOOKED beneath her eyelids, where her eyes
    Like stars were deep, and dim like summer skies;
      I looked beneath their lashes; and behold!
      My own thought mirrored in their maiden gold.
    Shame drew to them to cloud their light with lies,
      And shrank back shamed; but Love waxed bright and bold.

    The devilish circle of the fiery ring<<1>>
    Became one moment like a little thing,
      And Truth and God were near us to withdraw
      The veil of Love's unalterable law.
    We feared no fury of the jealous King,
      But, lest in honour love should find a flaw. {98B}

<<1. "i.e." the wedding ring.>>

    Only our looks and trembling lips we dread,
    And the dear nimbus of a lover's head,
      The dreamy splendour and the dim-delight
      That feels the fragrance fallen from the night,
    When soul to soul is locked, and eyes are wed,
      And lips not touched kiss secretly by sight.

    These things we fear, and move as in a mist
    One from the other, and we had not kissed.
      Only the perfume of her lips and hair
      Love's angel wafted slowly to me there,
    And as I went like death away I wist
      Its savour faded, nor my soul aware.

    I turned and went away, away, away,
    Out of the night that was to me the day,
      And road to meet the sun to hide in light
      The sorrow of the day that was the night.
    So I rode slowly in the morning gray,
      And all the meadows with the frost were white.

    And lo! between the mountains there uprose
    The winter sun; and all the forest glows,
      And the frost burns like fire before my eyes,
      While the white breeze awoke with slumberous sighs
    And stirred the branches of the pine; it knows,
      It surely knows how weary are the wise!

    Even my horse my sorrow understands,
    Would turn and bear me to those western lands;
      In love would turn me back; in love would bring
      My thirsty lips to the one perfect spring --
    My iron soul upon my trembling hands
      Had its harsh will; my bitterness was king.

    So verily long time I rode afar.
    My course was lighted by some gloomy star
      That boded evil, that I would not shun,
      But rather welcome, as the storm the sun,
    Lowering and red, a hurtful avatar,
      Whose fatal forehead like itself is dun {99A}

    It was no wonder when the second day
    Showed me a city on the desert way,
      Whose brazen gates were open, where within
      I saw a statue for a sign of sin,
    And saw the people come to it and pray,
      Before its mouth set open for a gin.

    And seeing me, a clamour rose among
    Their dwarfish crowds, whose barbarous harsh tongue
      Grated, a hateful sound; they plucked me down,
      And mocked me through the highways of the town,
    And brought me where they sang to censers swung
      A grotesque hymn before her body brown.

    For Sin was like a woman, and her feet
    Shone, and her face was like the windy wheat;
      Her eyes were keen and horrible and cold,
      Her bronze loins girdled with the sacred gold;
    Her lips were large, and from afar how sweet!
      How fierce and purple for a kiss to hold!

    But somehow blood was black upon them; blood
    In stains and clots and splashes; and the mud
      Trampled around her by the souls that knelt,
      Worshipping where her false lewd body dwelt,
    Was dark and hateful; and a sleepy flood
      Trickled therefrom as magic gums that melt.

    I had no care that hour for anything:
    Not for my love, not for myself; I cling
      Desperate to despair, as some to hope,
      Unheeding Saturn in their horoscope;
    But I, despair is lord of me and king;
      But I, my thoughts tend ever to the rope. {99B}

    But I, unknightly, recreant, a coward,
    Dare not release my soul from fate untoward
      By such a craven's cunning.  Nay, my soul
      Must move unflinching to what bitter goal
    The angry gods design -- if gods be froward
      I am a man, nor fear to drain the bowl.

    Now some old devil, dead no doubt and damned,
    But living in her life, had wisely crammed
      Her fierce bronze throat with such a foul device
      As made her belly yearn for sacrifice.
    She leered like love on me, and smiled, and shammed,
      And did not pity for all her breast of spice.

    They thrust me in her hateful jaws, and I
    Even then resisted not, so fain to die
      Was my desire, so weary of the fight
      With my own love, so willing to be quite
    Sure of my strength by death; and eagerly
      Almost I crossed the barrier keen and white.

    When lo! a miracle!  Her carven hand
    Is lifted, and the little space is spanned,
      And I am plucked from out her maw, and set
      Down on the pedestal, whose polished jet
    Shone like a mirror out of hell -- I stand
      Free, where the blood of other men is wet.

    So slowly, while the mob stood back, I went
    Out of the city, with no life content,
      And certain I should meet no death at least.
      Soon, riding ever to the stubborn east,
    I came upon a shore whose ocean bent
      In one long curve, where folk were making feast. {100A}

    So with no heart to feast, I joined the mirth,
    Mingled the dances that delight the earth,
      And laughing looked in every face of guile.
      Quick was my glance and subtle was my smile;
    Ten thousand little loves were brought to birth,
      Ten thousand loves that laughed a little while.

    No; for one woman did not laugh, too wise!
    But came so close, and looked within my eyes
      So deeply that I saw not anything.
      Only her eyes grew, as a purple ring
    Shielding the sun.  They grew; they uttered lies --
      They fascinate and cleave to me and cling.

    Then in their uttermost profound I saw
    The veil of Love's unalterable law
      Lifted, and in the shadow far behind
      Dim and divine, within the shadow blind
    My own love's face most amorously draw
      Out of the deep toward my cloudy mind.

    O suddenly I felt a kiss enclose
    My whole live body, as a rich red rose
      Folding its sweetness round the honey-bee!
      I felt a perfect soul embracing me,
    And in my spirit like a river flows
      A passion like the passion of the sea.


                       II.

    HE did not kiss me with his mouth; his eyes
    Kissed mine, and mine kissed back; it was not wise,
    But yet he had the strength to leave me; so
    I was so glad he loved enough to go.

    My arms could never have released his neck;
    He saved our honour from a single speck.
    And so he went away; and fate inwove
    The bitterest of treason for our love. {100B}

    For scarce two days when sickness took the King,
    And death dissolved the violence of the ring.
    I ruled alone: I left my palace gate
    To see if Love should have the laugh at Fate.

    And so I violated Death, and died;
    But in the other land my spirit cried
    For incarnation; conquering I came
    Within my soulless body as a flame.

    Endowing which with sacred power I sought
    A little while, as thought that seeks for thought.
    I found his changeless love endure as mine,
    His passion curl around me as a vine.

    So clinging fibres of desire control
    My perfect body,and my perfect soul
    Shot flakes of light toward him.  So my eyes,
    Seeking his face, wee made divinely wise.

    So, solemn, silent, 'mid a merry folk
    I bound him by my forehead's silver yoke,
    And grew immense about him and within,
    And so possessed him wholly, without sin.

    For I had crossed the barrier and knew
    There was no sin.  His lips reluctant grew
    Ardent at last as recognizing me,
    And love's wild tempest sweeps upon his sea.

    And I?  I knew not anything, but know
    We are still silent, and united so,
    And all our being spells one vast To Be,
    A passion like the passion of the sea.


            THE LEGEND OF BEN LEDI.<<1>>

<<1. The "Hill of God.">>

    ON his couch Imperial Alpin<<1>>
      In majestic grandeur lay,
    Dying with the sun that faded
      O'er the plain of granite gray. {101A}

<<1. The First King of all Scotland.>>

    Snowy white his beard descended,
      Flecked with foeman's crimson gore,
    And he rose and grasped his broadsword,
      And he prayed to mighty Thor:

    "God of thunder, god of battle,
      God of pillage and of war,
    Hear the king of Scotland dying
      On the Leny's thundrous shore!

    "Thrice three hundred have I smitten
      With my single arm this day;
    Now of life my soul is weary,
      I am old, I pass away.

    "Grant me this, immortal monarch,
      Such a tomb as ne'er before,
    Such a tomb as never after
      Monarch thought or monarch saw."

    Then he called his sons around him,
      And he spake again and cried:
    "Seven times a clansman's bowshot
      Lay me from the Leny's side.

    "Where the plain to westward sinketh,
      Lay me in my tartan plaid,
    All uncovered to the tempest,
      In my hand my trusty blade."

    Hardly had he spake the order,
      When his spirit passed away;
    And his sons their heads uncovered
      As they bore him o'er the brae.

    Seven times did Phail McAlpine
      Bend his mighty bow of yew;
    Seven times with lightning swiftness
      West the winged arrow flew.

    Seven times a clansman's bowshot
      From the Leny's western shore,
    Laid they him where on to Achray
      Spread the plain of Ian Vohr.

    Hard by Teith's tumultuous waters
      Camped his sons throughout the night,
    Till the rosy blush of morning
      Showed a vast majestic sight {101B}

    Where of late the plain extended
      Rose a mighty mass of stone,
    Pierced the clouds, and sprang unmeasured
      In magnificence -- alone!

    There the clansmen stood and wondered,
      As the rock, supremely dire,
    Split and trembled, cracked and thundered,
      Lit with living flecks of fore.

    Spake the chief: "My trusty clansmen,
      This is not the day of doom;
    This is honour to the mighty;
      Clansmen, this is Alpin's tomb."

    NYMPSFIELD RECTORY.
         "December" 1893


           A DESCENT OF THE MOENCH.<<1>>

<<1. The first guideless traverse of this mountain, one of the peaks of the Bernese Oberland.>>

                  July 14, 1896.

    AN island of mist.  White companies
    Of clouds thronged wondrously against the hills,
    And in the east a darkening of the winds
    That held awhile their breath for very rage,
    Too wild for aught but vaporous quivering
    Of melting fleeces, while the sudden sun
    Fled to his home.  Afar the Matterhorn
    Reared a gaunt pinnacle athwart the bank,
    Where towered behind it one vast pillar of cloud
    To thrice its height.  Behold the ice-clad dome
    On which we stood, all weary of the way,
    And marked the east awaken into scorn,
    And rush upon us.  Then we set our teeth
    To force a dangerous passage, and essayed
    The steep slope not in vain.  We pushed our way
    Slowly and careworn down the icy ridge,
    Hewing with ponderous strokes the riven ice
    In little flakes and chips, and now again
    Encountered strange and fearsome sentinels, {102A}
    Gray pinnacles of lightning-riven rock
    Fashioned of fire and night.  We clomb adown
    Fantastic cliffs of gnarled stone, and saw
    The vivid lightning flare in purple robes
    Of flame along the ridge, and even heard
    Its terrible crackle, 'mid the sullen roar
    Of answering thunder.  Now the driven hail
    Beat on our faces, while we strove to fling
    Aloft the axe of forged steel, encased
    In glittering ice, and smite unceasingly
    On the unyielding slope of ice, as black
    As those most imminent ghosts of Satan's frown
    That shut us out from heaven, while the snow
    Froze on our cheeks.  Thus then we gained the field
    Where precipice and overwhelming rock,
    Avalanche, crag, leap through the dazzled air
    To pile their mass in one Lethean plain
    Of undulations of rolled billowy snow
    Rent, seamed, and scarred with wound on jagged wound,
    Blue-rushing to the vague expanse below
    Of the unknown secrecies of mountain song.
    Dragging behind us beautiful weary limbs,
    We turned snow-blinded eyes towards the pass<<1>>
    That shot a jasper wall above the mist
    Into the lightning-kindled firmament,
    Behind whose battlements a shelter<<2>>  lay,
    Rude-built of pine, whose parents in the storm
    Of some vast avalanche were swept away
    Into the valley.  Thither we hasted on,
    And there, as night stretched out a broken wing
    Torn by the thunder and the bitter strife
    Of warring flames and tempest's wrath, we came
    And flung ourselves within, and laid us down
    At last to sleep; and Sleep, a veined shape
    Of naked stateliness, came down to us,
    And tenderly stooped down, and kissed our brows. {102B}

<<1. The Monchjoch.>>
<<2. The Berglihutte.>>


                 IN A CORNFIELD.

        O VOICE of sightless magic
          Clear through day's crystal sky,
        Blithe, contemplative, tragic,
          As men may laugh or sigh;
        As men may love or sorrow,
        Their moods thy music borrow
          To bid them live or die.
        So sweet, so sad, so lonely,
        In silent noontide only
          Thy song-wings float and lie
        On cloud-foam scarred and riven,
        By God's red lightnings shriven,
        And quiet hours are given
          To him that lingers nigh.

        Fain would I linger near thee
          Amid the poppies red,
        Forget this world, and hear thee
          As one among the dead;
        Amid the daffadillies,
        Red tulips and white lilies,
          Where daisies' tears are shed;
        Where larkspur and cornflower
        Are blue with sunlight's hour,
          And all the earth is spread
        As in a dream before me;
        While steals divinely o'er me
        Love's scented spring to draw me
          From moods of dreamy dread.

        O winged passion! traveller
          Too near to God to see!
        O lyrical unraveller
          Of knotted life to me!
        O song!  O shining river
        Of thought and sound!  O giver
          Of goodly words of glee!
        Like to a star that singeth,
        A flower that incense bringeth,
          A love-song of the free!
        Oh! let me sing thy glories
        While spring winds whisper stories
        Of winter past, whose shore is
          Beyond a shoreless sea. {103A}

        Sing on, thou lyric lover!
          Sing on, and thrill me long
        With such delights as cover
          The days and deeds of wrong!
        Live lyre of songs immortal
        That pierce Heaven's fiery portal
          With shafts of splendour strong,
        Winged with thought's sharpest fires,
        Arrowed with soul's desires
          And sped from thunder's thong;
        Heaven's gates rock, rage, and quiver,
        Earth's walls gape wide and shiver,
        While Freedom doth deliver
          Men's spirits with thy song.

        Ah, chainless, distant, fleeting,
          To lands that know no sea,
        Where ocean's stormy greeting
          Fills no man's heart with glee;
        Where lovers die or sever,
        And death destroys for ever,
          And God bears slavery: --
        Fly thither, so thou leave us
        That no man's hand may reave us
          Of this -- that we are free.
        Free all men that may heed thee,
        On freemen's praises feed thee,
        Who chorus full, "God speed thee,
          Live lyre of Liberty!"


                     DREAMS.

    WHAT words are these that shudder through my sleep,
      Changing from silver into crimson flakes,
        And molten into gold
    Like the pale opal through those gray may sweep
      A scarlet flame, like eyes of crested snakes,
        Keen, furious, and too cold.

    What words are these?  The pall of slumber lifts;
      The veil of finiteness withdraws.  The night
        Is heavier, life burns low: {103B}
    Yet to the quivering brain three goodly gifts
      The cruelty of Pluto and his might
        In the abyss bestow:

    Change, foresight, fear.  The pageant whirls and boils;
      Restricted not by space an time, my dream
        Foresees the doom of Fate;
    My spirit wrestles in the Dream-King's toils
      Always in vain, and Hope's forerunners gleam
        Alway one step too late.

    Not as when sunlight strikes the counterpane;
      Half wakening, sleep rolls back her iron wave,
        And dawn brings blithesomeness;
    Not as when opiates lull the tortured brain
      And sprinkle lotus on the drowsy grave
        Of earth's old bitterness;

    But as when consciousness half rouses up
      And hurls back all the gibbering harpy crowd;
        And sleep's draught deepeneth,
    And all the furies of hell's belly sup
      In the brain's palaces, and chant aloud
        Songs that foretaste of Death.

    Maddened, the brain breaks from beneath the goad,
      Flings off again the foe, and from its hell
        Brings for a moment peace,
    Till weariness and her infernal load
      Of phantom memory-shapes return to quell
        The shaken fortresses.

    Till nature reassert her empery,
      And the full tide of wakefulness at last
        Foam on the shore of sleep
    To beat the white cliffs of reality
      In vain, because their windy strength is past,
        And only memories weep. {104A}

    Why is the Finite real?  And that world
      So larger, so more beautiful and fleet,
        So free, so exquisite,
    The world of dreams and shadows, not impearled
      With solitary shaft of Truth?  Too sweet,
        O children of the Night,

    Are your wide realms for our philosophers,
      Who must in hard gray balance-shackles bind
        The essence of all thought:
    No sorrier sexton in a grave inters
      The nobler children of a poet's mind
        Of wine and gold well wrought.

    By the poor sense of touch they judge that this
      Or that is real or not.  Have they divined
        This simplest spirit-bond,
    The joy of some bad woman's deadly kiss;
      The thought-flash that well tunes a lover's mind
        Seas and gray gulfs beyond?

    So that which is impalpable to touch,
      They judge by touch; the viewless they decide
        By sight; their logic fails,
    Their jarring jargon jingles -- even such
      An empty brazen pot -- wise men deride
        The clouds that mimic whales.

    My world shall be my dreams.  Religion there
      And duty may disturb me not at all;
        Nor doubts, nor fear of death.
    I straddle on no haggard ghostly mare;
      Yea, through my God, I have leapt o'er a wall!
        (As poet David saith.)

    The wall that ever girds Earth's thought with brass
      Is all a silver path my feet beneath,
        And o'er its level sward {104B}
    Of sea-reflecting white flowers and fresh grass
      I walk.  Man's darkness is a leathern sheath,
        Myself the sun-bright sword!

    I have no fear, nor doubt, nor sorrow now,
      For I give Self to God -- I give my best
        Of soul and blood and brain
    To my poor Art -- there comes to me somehow
      This fact; Man's work is God made manifest;
        Life is all Peace again.

    And Dreams are beyond life.  Their wider scope,
      Limitless Empire o'er the world of thought,
        Help my desires to press
    Beyond all stars toward God and Heaven and Hope;
      And in the world-amazing chase is wrought
        Somehow -- all Happiness.



               THE TRIUMPH OF MAN.

    BEFORE the darkness, earlier than being,
    When yet thought was not, shapeless and unseeing,
    Made misbegotten of deity on death,
    There brooded on he waters the strange breath
    Of an incarnate hatred.  Darkness fell
    And chaos, from prodigious gulphs of hell.
    Life, that rejoiced to travail with a man,
    Looked where the cohorts of destruction ran,
    Saw darkness visible, and was afraid,
    Seeing.  There grew like Death a monster shade,
    Blind as the coffin, as the covering sod
    Damp, as the corpse obscene, the Christian God.
    So to the agony dirges of despair
    Man cleft the womb, and shook the icy air
    With bitter cries for light and life and love.
    But these, begotten of the world above, {105A}
    Withdrew their glory, and the iron world
    Rolled on its cruel way, and passion furled
    Its pure wings, and abased itself, and bore
    Fetters impure, and stooped, and was no more.
    But resurrection's ghastly power grew strong,
    And Lust was born, adulterous with Wrong,
    The Child of Lies; so man was blinded still,
    Garnered the harvest of abortive ill,
    For wheat reaped thistles, and for worship wrought
    A fouler idol of his meanest thought:
    A monster, vengeful, cruel, traitor, slave,
    Lord of disease and father of the grave,
    A treacherous bully, feeble as malign,
    Intolerable, inhuman, undivine,
    With spite close girded and with hatred shod,
    A snarling cur, the Christian's Christless God.
    Out! misbegotten monster! with thy brood,
    The obscene offspring of thy pigritude,
    Incestuous wedlock with the Pharisees
    That hail the Christ a son of thee!  Our knees
    Bend not before thee, and our earth-bowed brows
    Shake off their worship, and reject thy spouse,
    The harlot of the world!  For, proud and free,
    We stand beyond thy hatred, even we:
    We broken in spirit beneath bitter years,
    Branded with the burnt-offering of tears,
    Spit out upon the lie, and in thy face
    Cast back the slimy falsehood; to your place,
    Ye Gadarean swine, too foul to fling
    Into the waters that abound and spring!
    Back, to your mother filth!  With hope, and youth,
    Love, light, and power, and mastery of truth
    Armed, we reject you; the bright scourge we ply,
    Your howling spirits stumble to your sty:
    The worm that was your lie -- our heel its head
    Bruises, that bruised us once; the snake is dead.
    Who of mankind that honours man discerns
    That man of all men, whose high spirit burns, {105B}
    Crowned over life, and conqueror of death,
    The godhood that was Christ of Nazareth --
    Who of all men, that will not gird his brand
    And purge from priestcraft the uxorious land?
    Christ, who lived, died, and lived, that man might be
    Tameless and tranquil as the summer sea,
    That laughs with love of the broad skies of noon,
    And dreams of lazy kissings of the moon,
    But listens for the summons of the wind,
    Shakes its white mane, and hurls its fury blind
    Against oppression, gathers its steep side,
    Rears as a springing tiger, flings its tide
    Tremendous on the barriers, smites the sand,
    And gluts its hunger on the breaking land;
    Engulphing waters fall and overwhelm: --
    Christ, who stood dauntless at the shaken helm
    On Galilee, who quelled the wrath of God,
    And rose triumphant over faith, and trod
    With calm victorious feet the icy way
    When springtide burgeoned, and the rosy day
    Leapt from beneath the splendours of the snow: --
    Christ, ultimate master of man's hateful foe,
    And lord of his own soul and fate, strikes still
    From man's own heaven, against the lord of ill;
    Stage thunders mock the once terrific nod
    That spoke the fury of the Christian God,
    Whose slaves deny, too cowardly to abjure,
    Their desecrated Moloch.  The impure
    Godhead is powerless, even on the slave,
    Who once could scar the forehead of the brave,
    Break love's heart pitiful, and reach the strong
    Through stricken children, and a mother's wrong.
    Day after darkness, life beyond the tomb!
    Manhood reluctant from religion's womb
    Leaps, and sweet laughters flash for freedom's birth
    That thrills the old bosom of maternal earth. {106A}
    The dawn has broken; yet the impure fierce fire
    Kindles the grievous furnace of desire
    Still for the harpy brood of king and priest,
    Slave, harlot, coward, that make human feast
    Before the desecrated god, in hells
    Of darkness, where the mitred vampire dwells,
    Where still death reigns, and God and priests are fed,
    Man's blood for wine, man's flesh for meat and bread,
    The lands of murder, of the obscene things
    That snarl at freedom, broken by her wings,
    That prop the abomination, cringe and smile,
    Caressing the dead fetich, that defile
    With hideous sacraments the happy land.
    Destruction claims its own; the hero's hand
    Grips the snake's throat; yea, on its head is set
    The heel that crushes it, the serpent wet
    With that foul blood, from human vitals drained,
    From tears of broken women, and sweat stained
    From torturers' cloths; the sickly tide is poured,
    And all the earth is blasted; the green sward
    Burns where it touches, and the barren sod
    Rejects the poison of the blood of God.
    Yet, through the foam of waters that enclose
    Their sweet salt bosoms, through the summer rose,
    Through flowers of fatal fire, through fields of air
    That summer squanders, ere the bright moon bare
    Her maiden bosom, through the kissing gold
    Where lovers' lips are molten, and breasts hold
    Their sister bodies, and deep eyes are wed,
    And fire of fire enflowers the sacred head
    Of mingling passion, through the silent sleep
    Where love sobs out its life, and new loves leap
    To being, through the dawn of all new things,
    There burns an angel whose amazing wings {106B}
    Wave in the sunbright air, whose lips of flame
    Chant the almighty music of One Name
    Whose perfume fills the silent atmosphere,
    Whose passionate melodies caress the ear;
    An angel, strong and eloquent, aloud
    Cries to the earth to lift the final shroud,
    And, having burst Faith's coffin, to lay by
    The winding-sheet of Infidelity,
    And rise up naked, as a god, to hear
    This message from the reawakened sphere;
    Words with love clothed, with life immortal shod: --
    "Mankind is made a little part of God."<<1>>
<<1. "i.e." the idea of God, dissociated from the legends of priests, and assimilated to the impersonal Parabrahma of the Hindu.  This dual use of the word is common throughout Crowley: the context is everywhere sufficient to decide.  In the play "Jephthah," however, conventional ideas are followed.>>
    Till the response, full chorus of the earth,
    Flash through the splendid portals of rebirth,
    Completing Truth in its amazing span: --
    "Godhead is made the Spirit that is Man."
    To whose white mountains, and their arduous ways,
    Turn we our purpose, till the faith that slays
    Yield up its place to faith that gives us life,
    The faith to conquer in the higher strife;
    Our single purpose, and sublime intent,
    With their split blood to seal our sacrament,
    Who stand among the martyrs of the Light;
    Our single purpose, by incarnate might
    Begotten after travail unto death,
    To live within the light that quickeneth;
    To tread base thoughts as our high thoughts have trod,
    Deep in the dust, the carrion that was God;
    Conquer our hatreds as the dawn of love
    Conquered that fiend whose ruinous throne above
    Broke lofty spirits once, now falls with fate,
    At last through his own violence violate; {107A}
    To live in life, breathe freedom with each breath,
    As God breathed tyranny and died in death;
    Secure the sacred fastness of the soul,
    Uniting self to the absolute, the whole,
    The universal marriage of mankind,
    Free, perfect, broken from the chains that bind,
    Force infinite, love pure, desire untold,
    And mutual raptures of the age of gold,
    The child of freedom!  So the moulder, man,
    Shake his grim shoulders, and the shadows wan
    Fall to forgetfulness; so life revives
    And new sweet loves beget diviner lives,
    And Freedom stands, re-risen from the rod,
    A goodlier godhead than the broken God;
    Uniting all the universe in this
    Music more musical than breezes' kiss,
    A song more potent that the sullen sea,
    The triumph of the freedom of the free;
    One stronger song than thrilled the rapturous birth
    Of stars and planets and the mother, earth;
    As lovers, calling lovers when they die,
    Strangle death's torture in love's agony;
    As waters, shaken by the storm, that roar,
    Sea unto sea; as stars that burn before
    The blackness; as the mighty cry of swords
    Raging through battle, for its stronger chords;
    And for its low entrancing music, made
    As waters lambent in the listening glade;
    As Sappho's yearning to to the amorous sea;
    As Man's Prometheus, in captivity
    Master and freeman; as the holy tune
    All birds, all lovers, whisper to the moon.
    So, passionate and pure, the strong chant rolls,
    Queen of the mystic unity of souls;
    So from eternity its glory springs
    King of the magical brotherhood of kings;
    The absolute crown and kingdom of desire,
    Earth's virgin chaplet, molten in the fire,
    Sealed in the sea, betokened by the wind:
    "There is one God, the Spirit of Mankind!" {107B}


              THE DREAMING DEATH.<<1>>

<<1. The scene of this poem is a little spinney near the wooden bridge in Love Lane, Cambridge. -- A.C.>>

    MY beauty in thy deep pure love
    Anchors its homage far above
    All lights of heaven.  The stars awake;
    The very stars bend down to take
    From its fresh fragrance for the sake
    Of their own cloud-compelling peace.
    On earth there lies a silver fleece
    Of new-fallen snow, secure from sun,
    In alleys, leafy every one
    This year already with the spring.
    The breeze blows freshly, thrushes sing,
    And all the woods are burgeoning
    With quick new buds; across the snow
    The scent of violets to and fro
    Wafts at the hour of dawn.  Alone
    I wait, a figure turned to stone
    (Or salt for pain).  A week ago
    Thine arms embraced me; now I know
    Far off they clasp the empty air:
    Thy lips seek home, and in despair
    Lament aloud over the frosted moor.
    Sad am I, sad, albeit sure
    There is no change of God above
    And no abatement of our love.
    For still, though thou be gone, I see
    In the glad mirror secretly
    That I am beautiful in thee.
    Thy love irradiates my eyes,
    Tints my skin gold; its melodies
    Of music run over my face;
    Smiles envy kisses in the race
    To bathe beneath my eyelids.  Light
    Clothes me and circles with the might
    Of warmer rosier suns.  Thy kiss
    Dwells on my bosom, and it is
    A glittering mount of fire, that burns
    Incense unnamed to heaven, and yearns
    In smoke toward thy home.  Desire
    Bellies the sails of molten fire
    Upon the ship of Youth with wind
    Urgently panting out behind,
    Impatient till the strand appear {108A}
    And the blue sea have ceased to rear
    Fountains of foam against the prow.
    Hail!  I can vision even now
    That golden shore.  A lake of light
    Burns to the sky; above, the night
    Hovers, her wings grown luminous.
    (I think she dearly loveth us.)
    The sand along the glittering shore
    Is all of diamond; rivers pour
    Unceasing floods of light along,
    Whose virtue is so bitter strong
    That he who bathes within them straight
    Rises an angel to the gate
    Of heaven and enters as a king.
    Birds people it on varied wing
    Of rainbow; fishes gold and fine
    Dart like bright stars through fount and brine,
    And all the sea about our wake
    Foams with the silver water-snake.
    There is a palace veiled in mist.
    A single magic amethyst
    Built it; the incense soothly sighs;
    So the light stream upon it lies.
    There thou art dwelling.  I am ware
    The music of thine eyes and hair
    Calls to the wind to chase our ship
    Faster toward; the waters slip
    Smoothly and swift beneath the keel.
    The pulses of the vessel feel
    I draw toward thee; now the sails
    Hang idly, for the golden gales
    Drop as the vessel grates the sand.
    Come, thou true love, and hold my hand!
    I tremble (for my love) to land.
    I feel thy arms around me steal;
    Thy breath upon my cheeks I feel;
    Thy lips draw out to mine: the breath
    Of ocean grows as still as death;
    The breezes swoon for very bliss.
    The sacrament of true love's kiss
    Accomplishes: I feel a pain
    Stab my heart through and sleep again,
    And I am in thine arms for ever.
          .     .     .     .     .
    There came a tutor, who had never
    Known the response of love to love;
    He wandered through the woods above
    The river, and came suddenly {108B}
    Where he lay sleeping.  Purity
    And joy beyond the speech of man
    Dwelt on his face, divinely wan.
    "How beautiful is sleep!" he saith,
    Bends over him.  There is no breath,
    No sound, no motion: it is death.
    And gazing on the happy head
    "How beautiful is Death!" he said.


               A SONNET IN SPRING.

    O CHAINLESS Love, the frost is in my brain,
      Whose swift desires and swift intelligence
      Are dull and numb to-day; because the sense
    Only responds to the sharp key of pain.
    O free fair Love, as welcome as the rain
      On thirsty fallows, come, and let us hence
      Far where the veil of Summer lies immense,
    A haze of heat on ocean's purple plain.

    O wingless Love, let us away together
      Where the sure surf rings round the beaten strand;
    Where the sky stands, a dome of flawless weather,
      And the stars join in one triumphal band,
    Because we broke the inexorable tether
      That bound our passion with an iron hand.


                 DE PROFUNDIS.<<1>>

<<1. Composed while walking home through the starry streets from an evil evening in St. Petersburg.  Vv. 1-3 are the feelings, vv."sqq." the reflections thus engendered.>>

    BLOOD, mist, and foam, then darkness.  On my eyes
    Sits heaviness, the poor worn body lies
      Devoid of nerve and muscle; it were death
    Save for the heart that throbs, the breast that sighs.

    The brain reels drowsily, the mind is dulled,
    Deadened and drowned by noises that are lulled
      By the harsh poison of the hateful breath.
    All sense and sound and seeing is annulled. {109A}

    Within a body dead a deadened brain
    Beats with the burden of a shameful pain,
      The sullen agony that dares to think,
    And think through sleep, and wake to think again.

    Fools! bitter fools!  Our breaths and kisses seem
    Constrained in devilry, debauch, and dream:
      Lives logged in the morass of meat and drink,
    Loves dipped in Phlegethon,<<1>> the perjured stream.

<<1. The fiery river of Hades.>>

    Behold we would that hours and minutes pass,
    Watch the sands falling in the eager glass;
      To wile their weariness is pleasure's bliss;
    But ah! the years! like smoke They fade, alas!

    We weep them as they slip away; we gaze
    Back on the likeness of the former days --
      The hair we fondle and the lips we kiss --
    Roses grow yellow and no purple stays.

    Ah! the old years!  Come back, ye vanished hours
    We wasted; come, grow red, ye faded flowers!
      What boots the weariness of olden time
    Now, when old age, a tempest-fury, lowers?

    Up to high God beyond the weary land
    The days drift mournfully; His hoary hand
      Gathers them.  Is it so?  My foolish rhyme
    Dreams they are links upon an endless band.

    The planets draw in endless orbits round
    The sun; itself revolves in the profound
      Deep wells of space; the comet's mystic track
    By the strong rule of a closed curve is bound. {109B}

    Why not with time?  To-morrow we may see
    The circle ended -- if to-morrow be --
      And gaze on chaos, and a week bring back
    Adam and Eve beneath the apple tree.

    Or, like the comet, the wild race may end
    Out into darkness, and our circle bend
      Round to all glory in a sudden sweep,
    And speed triumphant with the sun to friend.

    Love will not leave my home.  She knows my tears,
    My angers and caprices; still my ears
      Listen to singing voices, till I weep
    Once more, less sadly, and set hounds on fears.

    She will not leave me comfortless.  And why?
    Through the dimmed glory of my clouded eye
      She catches one sharp glint of love for her:
    She will not leave me ever till I die: --

    Nay, though I die!  Beyond the distant gloom
    Heaven springs, a fountain, out of Change's womb!
      Time would all men within the grave inter: --
    For Time himself shall no god find a tomb?

    Glory and love and work precipitate
    The end of man's desire -- so sayeth Fate.
      Man answers: Love is stronger, work more sure,
    Glory more fadeless than her shafts abate.

    Though all worlds fail, the pulse of Life be still,
    God fall, all darken, she hath not her will
    Of deeds beyond recall, that shall endure:
    For us, these three divinest glasses fill,

    Fill to the brim with lustrous dew, nor fail
    To leave the blossom and the nightingale,
      Love's earlier kiss, and manhood's glowing prime,
    These us suffice.  Shall man or Fate prevail? {110A}

    Lo, we are blind, and dubious fingers grope
    In Despair's dungeon for the key of Hope;<<1>>
      Lo, we are chained, and with a broken rhyme
    Would file our fetters and enlarge our scope.

<<1. See Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, where Hope unlocks the dungeon of Giant Despair.  Crowley more wisely would use the key of Work.>>

    Yet ants may move the mountain; none is small
    But he who stretches out no arm at all;
      Toadstools have wrecked fair cities in a night,
    One poet's song may bid a kingdom fall.

    Add to thy fellow-men one ounce of aid --
    The block begins to shift, the start is made:
      The rest is thine; with overwhelming might
    The balance changes,and the task is paid.

    Join'st thou thy feeble hands in foolish prayer
    To him thy brain hath moulded and set there
      In thy brain's heaven?  Such a god replies
    As thy fears move.  So men pray everywhere.

    What God there be, is real.  By His might
    Begot the universe within the night;
      If he had prayed to His own mind's weak lies
    Think'st thou the heaven and earth had stood upright?

    Remember Him, but smite!  No workman hews
    His stone aright whose nervy arms refuse
      To ply the chisel, but are raised to ask
    A visionary foreman he may choose

    From the distortions of a sodden mind.
    God did first work on earth when woman-kind
      He chipped from Adam's rib -- a thankless task
    I wot His wisdom has long since repined. {110B}

    Christ touched the leper and the widow's son;
    And thou wouldst serve the work the Perfect One
      Began, by folding arms and gazing up
    To heaven, as if thy work were rightly done.

    I tell thee, He should say, if ye were met:
    "Thou hadst a talent -- ah, thou hast it yet
      Wrapped in a napkin! thou shalt drain the cup
    Of that damnation that may not forget

    "The wasted hours!"  Ah, bitter interest
    Of our youth's capital -- forgotten zest
      In all the pleasures of o'erflowing life,
    Wine tasteless, tired the brain, and cold the breast!

    Ah! but if with it is one good deed wrought,
    One kind word spoken, one immortal thought
      Born in thee, all is paid; the weary strife
    Grows victory.  "Love is all and Death is nought."

    Such an one wrote that word<<1>>  as I would meet,
    Lay my life's burden at his silver feet,
      Have him give ear if I say "Master."  Yea!
    I know no heaven, no honour, half so sweet!

<<1. Browning, in "The Householder.">>

    He passed before me on the wheel of Time,
    He who knows no Time -- the intense sublime
      Master of all philosophy and play,
    Lord of all love and music and sweet rhyme.

    Follow thou him!  Work ever, if thy heart
    Be fervent with one hope, thy brain with art,
      Thy lips with song, thine arm with strength to smite:
    Achieve some act; its name shall not depart.

    Christ laid Love's corner-stone, and Caesar built
    The tower of glory; Sappho's life was split
      From fervent lips the torch of song to ignite:
    Thou mayst add yet a stone -- if but thou wilt. {111A}

    And yet the days stream by; night shakes the day
    From his pale throne of purple, to allay
      The tremors of the earth; day smiteth dark
    With the swift poignard dipped in Helios' ray.

    The days stream by; with lips and cheeks grown pale
    On their indomitable breast we sail.
      There is a favouring wind; our idle bark
    Lingers, we raise no silk to meet the gale.

    The bank slips by, we gather not its fruit,
    We plant no seed, we irrigate no root
      True men have planted; and the tare and thorn
    Spring to rank weedy vigour; poisons shoot

    Into the overspreading foliage;
    So as days darken into weary age
      The flowers are fewer; the weeds are stronger born
    And hands are grown too feeble to assuage

    Their venom; then, the unutterable sea!
    Is she green-cinctured with the earlier tree
      Of Life?  Do blossoms blow, or weeds create
    A foul rank undergrowth of misery?

    From the deep water of the bitterest brine
    Drowned children raise their arms; their lips combine
      To force a shriek; bid them go contemplate
    The cold philosophy of Zeno's<<1>>  shrine?

<<1. The Stoic.  To be distinguished from the Eleatic and the Epicurean of the same name.  He was born at Citium in Cyprus in 340 B.C.  He preached  GR:alpha-pi-alpha-theta-epsilon-iota-alpha, happiness in oneself independent of all circumstance, as the highest good.>>

    Nay, stretch a hand!  Although their eagle clutch
    O'erturn thy skiff, yet it is overmuch
      To grieve for that: life is not so divine --
    I count it little grief to part with such! {111B}

    We are wild serpents in a ring of fire;
    Our necks stretch out, our haggard eyes aspire
      In desperation; from the fearful line
    Our coils revulse in impotence and ire.

    An idle song it was the poet sang,
    A quavering note -- no brazen kettle's clang,
      But gentle, drooping, tearful.  Nay, achieve!
    I can remember how the finish rang

    Clear, sharp, and loud; the harp is glad to die
    And give the clarion one note silver-high.
      It was too sweet for music, and I weave
    In vain the tattered woof of memory.

    Ashes and dust!
      Cold cinders dead!
    Our swords are rust;
      Our lives are fled
    Like dew on glass.
      In vain we lust;
    Our hopes are sped,
      Alas! alas!
    From heaven we are thrust, we have no more trust.
      Alas!

    Gold hairs and gray!
      Red lips and white!
    Warm hearts, cold clay!
      Bright day, dim night!
    Our spirits pass
      Like the hours away.
    We have no light,
      Alas! alas!
    We have no more day, we are fain to say
      Alas!

    In Love's a cure
      For Fortune's hate;
    In Love's a lure
      Shall laugh at Fate;
    We have toiled Death's knell;
      All streams are pure; {112A}
    We are new-create;
      All's well, all's well!
    We have God to endure, we are very sure
      All's well!

    In such wise rang the challenge unto Death
    With clear high eloquence and happy breath;
      So did a brave sad heart grow glad again
    And mock the riddle that the dead Sphinx saith.

    When I am dead, remember me for this
    That I bade workers work, and lovers kiss;
      Laughed with the Stoic at the dream of pain,
    And preached with Jesus<<1>>  the evangel -- bliss.

<<1. The allusion betrays Crowley's ignorance (at this time) of the results of modern criticism of the New Testament.>>

    When I am dead, think kindly.  Frail my song?
    'Twas the poor utterance of an eager tongue;
      I stutter in my rhyme? my heart was full
    Of greater longings, more divinely wrung

    By love and pity and regret and trust,
    High hope from heaven that God will be just,
      Spurn not the child because his mind was dull,
    Still less condemn him for his father's lust.

    Yet I think priests shall answer Him in vain:
    Their gospel of disgrace, disease, and pain,
      Shall move His heart of Love to such a wrath --
    O Heart!  Turn back and look on Love again!

    Behold, I have seen visions, and dreamed dreams!
    My verses eddy in slow wandering streams,
      Veer like the wind, and know no certain path --
    Yet their worst shades re tinged with dawning beams! {112B}

    I have dreamed life a circle or a line,
    Called God, and Fate, and Chance, and Man, divine.
      I know not all I say, but through it all
    Mark the dim hint of ultimate sunshine!

    Remember me for this!  And when I go
    To sleep the last sleep in the slumberous snow,
      Let child and man and woman yet recall
    One little moment that I loved you so!

    Let some high pinnacle my tombstone be,
    My epitaph the murmur of the sea,
      The clouds of heaven be fleeces for my pall,
    My unknown grave the cradle of the free.


                   TWO SONNETS

    ON HEARING THE MUSIC OF BRAHMS AND TSCHAIKOWSKY.

                                   "To" C. G. LAMB.

                        I.

    MY soul is aching with the sense of sound
      Whose angels trumpet in the angry air;
    Wild maenads with their fiery snakes enwound
      In the black waves of my abundant hair.
    Now hath my life a little respite found
      In the brief pauses exquisite and rare;
    In the strong chain of music I am bound,
      And all myself before myself lies bare.

    Drown me, oh, drown me in your fiery stream!
      Wing me new visions, fierce enchanting birds!
        Peace is less dear than this delirious fight!
    For all the glowing fragrance of a dream
      And all the sudden ecstasy of words
        Deluge my spirit with a lake of light {113A}


                       II.

    The constant ripple of your long white hands,
      The soul-tormenting violin that speaks
      Truth, and enunciates all my soul seeks,
    That binds my love in its desirous bands,
    And clutches at my heart, until there stands
      No fibre yet unshaken, while it wreaks
      In one sharp song the agony of weeks,
    And all my soul and body understands.

    The music changes, and I know that here,
      In these new melodies, a tongue of fire
    Leaps at each waving of the silver spear;
      And all my sorrow dons delight's attire
    Because the gate of heaven is so near,
      And I have comprehended my desire.


                   A VALENTINE

                 (FEB. 14, 1897.)

    WHY did you smile when the summer was dying
      If it were not that the hours
    Might bring in winter, while sad winds are sighing,
      Some of Love's flowers?

    Now is beginning of spring, and I ask not
      Roses to flame o'er the lawn --
    Who should know better that peonies bask not
      In the sun's dawn?

    Still, through the snow, it may be there is peeping
      Veiled from the kiss of the sun
    One lone white violet, daintily sleeping,
      Hard to be won.

    So with my fairy white maiden (you hear me?)
      Winter may yet pass away;
    Spring my arrive, (will it find your heart near me?)
      Summer may stay. {113B}

    Passionate roses I seek not, whose glories
      Now are too fierce for the spring,
    While the white flames of the frost flake that hoar is
      Flicker, on wing.

    Only a primrose, a violet laden
      With the pale perfume of dawn;
    Only a snowdrop, my delicate maiden;
      These have no thorn.

    Old-fashioned love, yet you feel it a fountain
      Springing for ever, most pure;
    Old-fashioned love, yet as adamant mountain
      Solid and sure.

    Yes, tender thoughts on your lips will be breaking
      By-and-by into a smile;
    Love, ere he springs up divine at his waking,
      Slumbers awhile.

    So, my kissed snowdrop, you took its white blossom
      Tenderly into your hand,
    Kissed it three times, wear it yet in your bosom --
      I understand.


                  ODE TO POESY.

    UNTO what likeness shall I liken thee,
      O moon-wrought maiden of my dewy sleep?
    For thou art Queen of Thoughts, and unto me
      Sister and Bride; the worn earth's echoes leap
    Because thy holy name is Poesy.
        Whereto art thou most like?
    Thou art a Dian, crescent o'er the sea
      That beats sonorous on the craggy shore,
        Or shakes the frail earth-dyke.
      So calm and still and far, that never more
    Thy silken song shall quiver through the land;
    Only by coral isle, by lonely strand
    Where no man dwells, thy voice re-wakens wild and grand. {114A}

    Thou art an Aphrodite.  From the foam
      Of golden grape and red thou risest up
    Immaculate; thou hast an ebon comb
      Of shade and silence, and a jasper cup
    Wherein are mingled all desires.  Thine home
        Is in the forest shade.
    Thy pale feet kiss the daffodils; they roam
      By moss-grown springs, and shake the bluebell tips.
        Each flower of the deep glade
      Has whispered kisses for thy listening lips,
    While Eos blushes in the sky, to find
    A fairer, queenlier maiden, and as kind
    To man and maid, whose eyes are lit by the same mind.

    Thou hast, as Pallas hath, a polished shield,
      Whose Gorgon-head is Hatred, and a sword
    Sharper than Love's.  Thy wisdom is revealed
      To them who love, but thou hast aya abhorred
    The children of revenge; to them is sealed
        Thy book, so clear to me.
    Thy book where seven sins their sceptres wield,
      And seven sorrows track them, and one joy
        Cancels their infamy;
      Shame and regret are fused to an alloy,
    Whose drossy weight sinks down and is consumed,
    While o'er the ruddy metal is relumed
    A purer flame of piece, with knowledge now perfumed.

    Thy ways are very bitter.  Not one rose
      Twines in the crown of thorns thy spouse must wear;
    There is no Lethe for the scoffs, the blows,
      Nor find they a Cyrenian<<1>> anywhere
      Amid the mob, to lift my cross, to share
        Its burden: not one friend
    Whose love were silence, whose affection knows
      To press my hand and close my dying eyes
        There, at the endless end.
      I am alone on earth, and from the skies {114B}
    Sometimes I seem so far -- and yet, thy kiss
    Re-quickens Hope; through aether's emptiness
    Thou guidest me to touch the Hand of Him who Is.

<<1. Simon the Cyrenian, who bore the cross of Christ.>>

    Thou hadst a torch to lume my lips to song;
      Thou hast a cooler fountain for my thirst,
    Lest my young love should work thy fame a wrong;
      So the grape's veins in purple ardour burst,
    And opiates in bloomless gardens throng,
        And Life, a moon, wanes fast;
    But to thy garden richer buds belong
      And hardier flowers, and Love, a deathless sun,
        Flames eager to the last,
      And young desires in fleeter revels run,
    And life revives, and all the flowers rejoice,
    Bird and light butterfly have made their choice,
    Creation hymns its God with an united voice.

    There is a storm without.  The hoary trees
      Stagger; the foam is angry on the sea:
    I know the secret mountains are at ease,
      And in the deepest ice-embroidery
    Where great men's spirits linger there is peace.
        Heed not the unquiet wind!
    Dawn's finger shall be raised, its wrath shall cease,
      The sun shall rouse us whom the tempest lulled,
        And thy poor poet's mind
      For respite by its own deep anguish dulled
    Shall wake again to watch the cruel day
    Drift slowly on its chill and wasted way
    With but thy smile to inspire some sad melodious lay.

    From whose rude caverns sweep these gusty wings
      That shake the steeples as they mock at God?
    Who reared the stallion wind?  Whose foaling flings
      The billows starward?  Whose the steeds fire-shod {115}
    That sweep throughout the world?  What spearman sings
        The fearful chant of war
    That fires, and spurs, and maddens all the kings
      That rule o'er the earth, and air, and ocean?
        Whose hand excites the star
      To shatter into fiery flakes?  No man,
    No petty god, but One who governs all,
    Slips the sun's leash, perceives the sparrow's fall,
    Too high for man to fear, too near for man to call.


                    SONETS.<<1>>

<<1. The virulence of these sonnets is excusable when it is known that their aim was to destroy the influence in Cambridge of a man who headed in that University a movement parallel to that which at Oxford was associated with the name of Oscar Wilde.  They had their effect.>>

    TO THE AUTHOR OF THE PHRASE: "I AM
       NOT A GENTLEMAN AND I HAVE NO FRIENDS."


                        I.

    SELF-DAMNED, the leprous moisture of thy veins
      Sickens the sunshine, and thine haggard eyes,
      Bleared with their own corrupting infamies,
    Glare through the charnel-house of earthly pains.
    Horrible as already in hell.  There reigns
      The terror of the knowledge of the lies
      That mock thee; thy death's double destinies
    Clutch at the throat that sobs, and chokes, and strains.

    Self-damned on earth, live out thy tortured days,
      That men may look upon thy face, and see
      How vile a thing of woman born may be.
    Then, we are done with thee; go, go thy ways {115B}
      To other hells, thou damned of God hereafter,
      'Mid men's contempt and hate and pitiless laughter.


                       II.

    Lust, impotence, and knowledge of thy soul,
      And that foreknowledge, fill the fiery lake
      Of lava where thy lazar corpse shall break
    The burning surface to seek out a goal
    More horrible, unspeakable.  The scroll
      Opens, and "coward, liar, monster" shake
      Those other names of "goat" and "swine" and "snake"
    Wherewith Hell's worms caress thee and control.

    Nay, but alone, intolerably alone,
      Alone, as here, thy carrion soul shall swelter,
      Yearning in vain for sleep, or death, or shelter;
    No release possible, no respite known!
      Self-damned, without a friend, thy eternal place
      Sweats through the painting of thy harlot's face.

    "At the hour of the eclipse,"
      "Wednesday, Dec." 28.


                BESIDE THE RIVER.

    RAIN, rain in May.  The river sadly flows,
      A sullen silver crossed with sable bars,
      Damp, gloomy, shivering, while reluctant stars,
    Between swart masses of thick clouds that close,
      Drive with drooped plumes their winged cars
    Toward sleep, the scythe of woes.

    Woes, woes in Spring.  Ere summer deepeneth
      The pink of roses to a purpler tint;
      Ere ripening corn shafts back the sudden glint {116A}
    Of sunshine that brings healing with the breath
      Of western winds that sigh, they hint
    Of sleep, twin soul with death.

    Death, death ere dawn.  The night is over dark;
      Trees are grown terrible; the shadows wan
      Make shudder all the tense desires of man;
    No gleam of moonlight bears the golden mark
      Of sunny lips, nor shines upon
    Our sleep -- Love's birchen bark.

    Love, love to-night.  To-night is all we know,
      Is all our care; lips joined to lips we lie,
      Tender hands touching, hearts in tune to die,
    With willing kiss reluctant to let go;
      So sweet love's last enduring sigh
    For sleep, so sure, so slow.

    Sleep, sleep to-night.  Our arms are intertwined;
      Breath desires breath and hand imprisons hand;
      Breezes cool faces, rosy with the brand
    Of long sweet kisses; sun shall dawn and find
      Two lovers who have passed the land
    Of sleep -- and found Death kind.


                   MAN'S HOPE.

    HERE fades the last red glimmer of the sun;
      Ere day is night, when on the glittering bar
      The waves are foaming rubies, and afar
    Streaks of red water, gold on the horizon,
    On summer ripples rhythmically run;
      Ere dusk is weaned, there sails on silver car
      From the expectant East, the evening Star;
    And all the threads of sorrow are unspun. {116B}

    So He who ordered this shall still work thus,
      And ere life's lamp shall flicker into death,
    And Time lose all his empire over us,
      A gleam of Hope, of Knowledge, shall arise,
      A star to silver o'er Death's glooming skies,
    And gladden the last labouring torch of breath.


                     SONNET.

          FOR G. F. KELY'S DRAWING OF AN
                  HERMAPHRODITE.

    O BODY pale and beautiful with sin!
      O breasts with venom swollen by the snakes
      Of passion, whose cold slaver slimes and slakes
    Thy soul-consuming fevers that within
    Thy heart the fires of hell on earth begin!
      O heart whose yearning after truth forsakes
      The law of love!  O heart whose ocean breaks
    In sterile foam against some golden skin!

    O thou whose body is one perfect prayer,
      One long regret, one agony of shame,
    Lost in the fragrance, speeding, subtle and rare,
      Up to the sky, an avenue of flame!
    My soul, thy body, in the same sin curled,
    With vivid lust annihilate the world.


                A WOODLAND IDYLL.

    FRESH breath from the woodland blows sweet
      O'er the flowery path we are roaming,
    On the dimples of light lover's feet
      In the mystical charm of the gloaming,
                                       Yvonne!
    On the buds that blush bright as we meet
      In the mystical charm of the gloaming! {117A}

    A tear for the stars of the night,
      And a smile for the avenue shady,
    A kiss for the eyelashes bright,
      And a blush for the cheek of my lady,
                                       Yvonne!
    A laugh for the moon and her spite,
      And a blush for the cheek of my lady!

    We'll tread where the daffodils shake
      And the primrose smiles up through her weeping,
    Where the daisies dip down to the lake,
      Where the wonderful thrushes are sleeping,
                                       Yvonne!
    By the marge of the maze of the brake
      Where the wonderful thrushes are sleeping.

    Where the brook trickles clear to the eye
      Below dew-spangled frondlets of willow
    We will wander to find by-and-by
      The sward of our delicate pillow,
                                       Yvonne!
    Where the mosses so lusciously lie
    For the sward of our delicate pillow.

    For a bride fairer far than the flower
      Is the couch spread by fingers of even,
    The blossom of apples for bower,
      Its roof-tree the sapphires of heaven,
                                       Yvonne!
    For the bride of the mystical hour,
      Its roof-tree the sapphires of heaven!

    With songsters the heavy sweet air
      Is trembling and sighing and sobbing,
    With meteors magically fair
      The sky is deliciously throbbing,
                                       Yvonne!
    With spledour and subtlety rare
      The sky is deliciously throbbing.

    Sweet bride to fond arms with a sigh,
      Strong arms to fond bosom, are curling;
    The winds breathe more musically by;
      The moon has a rosier pearling,
                                       Yvonne!
    The stars grow more dim in the sky,
      The moon has a rosier pearling. {117B}


    So, birds, are you shy to awake
      Your voices to laughter-tuned numbers?
    So, sun, do you tremble to shake
      The dews of the night from our slumbers?
                                       Yvonne!
    So, breeze, to reluctant to take
      The dews of the night from our slumbers?

    Light breaks, and the breezes caress
      Cool limbs and sot eyes and fair faces;
    The nightingales carol to bless
      The dawn of our maiden embraces,
                                       Yvonne!
    The woods wear a lovelier dress
      In the dawn of our maiden embraces!


                  PERDURABO.<<1>>

<<1. "I shall endure to the end."  This was the mystic title taken by Crowley at his first initiation.>>

    EXILE from humankind!  The snow's fresh flakes
    Are warmer than men's hearts.  my mind is wrought
    Into dark shapes of solitary thought
    That loves and sympathises, but awakes
    No answering love or pity.  What a pang
    Hath this strange solitude to aggravate
    The self-abasement and the blows of Fate!
    No snake of hell hath so severe a fang!

    I am not lower than all men -- I feel
    Too keenly.  Yet my place is not above,
    Though I have this -- unalterable Love
    In every fibre.  I am crucified
    Apart on a lone burning crag of steel,
    Tortured, cast out; and yet -- I shall abide.


           ON GARRET HOSTEL BRIDGE.<<1>>

<<1. A bridge on the "Backs" at Cambridge.>>

    HERE in the evening curl white mists and wreathe in their vapour
      All the gray spires of stone, all the immobile towers; {118A}
    Here in the twilight gloom dim trees and sleepier rivers,
      Here where the bridge is thrown over the amber stream.
    Chill is the ray that steals from the moon to the stream that whispers
      Secret tales of source, songs of its fountain-head.
    Here do I stand in the dusk; like spectres mournfully moving
      Wisps of the cloud-wreaths form, dissipate into the mist,
    Wrap me in shrouds of gray, chill me and make me shiver,
      Not with the Night alone, not with the sound of her wing,
    Yet with a sense of something vague and unearthly stalking
      (Step after step as I move) me, to annul me, quell
    Hope and desire and life, bid light die under my eyelids,
      Bid the strong heart despair, quench the desire of Heaven.
    So I shudder a little; and my heart goes out to the mountain,
      Rock upon rock for a crown, snow like an ermine robe;
    Thunder and lightning free fashioned for speech and seeing,
      Pinnacles royal and steep, queen of the arduous breast!
    Ye on whose icy bosom, passionate, at the sunrise,
      Ye in whose wind-swept hollows, lulled in the moonrise clear,
    Often and oft I struggled, a child with an angry mother,
      Often and oft I slept, maid in a lover's arms.
    Back to ye, back, wild towers, from this flat and desolate fenland,
      Back to ye yet will I flee, swallow on wing to the south;
    Move in your purple cloud-banks and leap your far-swelling torrents,
      Bathe in the pools below, laugh with the winds above, {118B}
    Battle and strive and climb in the teeth of the glad wild weather,
      Flash on the slopes of ice, dance on the spires of rock,
    Run like a glad young panther over the stony high-lands,
      Shout with the joy of living, race to the rugged cairn,
    Feel the breath of your freedom burn in my veins, and Freedom!
      Freedom! echoes adown cliff and precipitous ghyll.
    Down by the cold gray lake the sun descends from his hunting,
      Shadow and silence steals over the frozen fells.
    Oh, to the there, my heart!  And the vesper bells awaken;
      Colleges call their children; Lakeland fades from the sight.
    Only the sad slow Cam like a sire with age grown heavy
      Wearily moves to the sea, to quicken to life at last.
    Blithelier I depart, to a sea of sunnier kindness;
      Hours of waiting are past; I re-quicken to love.


             ASTRAY IN HER PATHS.<<1>>

<<1. This satirical title is from Proverbs vii. 25.  A poet's nature is to refine to purest gold even the sordidest of dross.>>

            COPENHAGEN, "January," '97.

    I FEEL thee shudder, clinging to my arm,
    Before the battlements of the salt sea,
    Black billows tipped with phosphorescent light,
    Towering from where we stand to yonder shore
    That is no earthly shore, but guards the coast
    Of that which is from that which is to be;
    Wherefore it kindles no evasive fire
    Nor blazes through the night, but lies forgotten
    Gray in the twilight; never a star is out {119A}
    To light the broad horizon; only here
    Behind us cluster lamps, and busy sounds
    Of men proclaim a city; but to us
    They are not here; for we, because we love,
    Are not of earth, but, as the immortals, stand
    With eyes immutable; our souls are fed
    On a strange new nepenthe from the cup
    Of the vast firmament.  Nor do we dream,
    Nor think we aught of the transient world,
    But are absorbed in our own deity:
    And our clear eyes reflect -- (who dares to gaze
    Shall see an die!) -- the changeless empyrean
    Eternity, the concentrated void
    Of space, for being the centre of all things,
    Time is to us the Now, and Space the Here;
    From us all Matter radiates, is a part
    Of our own thoughts and souls; because we love.
    Thou shudderest, clinging to me; though the night
    Jewels her empire with the frosty crown
    Of thousand-twinkling stars, whose hoary crests
    Burn where light touches them, with diamond points
    Of infinite far fire, save where the sea
    Is ebony with sleep, and though the wind
    Pierces the marrow, since it is the word
    Of the Almighty, and cuts through the air
    That may not stay its fury, with a cold
    Nipping and chill, it is not in the wind;
    Nor though the thunder broke, or flashed the fire
    From all the circle of eternity,
    Were that the reason; for thou shudderest
    To hear the Voice of Love; it is no voice
    That men may hear, but an intensest rich
    Silence, that silence when man waits to hear
    Some faint vibration in the smitten air,
    And, if he hear not, die; but we who love
    Are beyond death, and therefore may commune
    In that still tongue; it is the only speech
    And song of stars and sun; nor is it marred
    By one dissentient tremor of the air
    That girds the earth, but in lone aether spreads {119B}
    Its song.  But now I turn to thee, whose eyes
    Blaze on me with such look as flesh and blood
    May never see and live; for so it burns
    Into the innest being of the spirit
    And stains its vital essence with a brand
    Of fire that shall not change; and shuddering I
    Gaze back, spirit to spirit, with the like
    Insatiable desire, that never quenched,
    Nor lessened by sublime satiety,
    But rather crescent, hotter with the flame
    Of its own burning, that consumes it not,
    Because it is the pure white flame of God.
    I shudder, holding thee to me; thy gaze
    Is still on me; a thousand years have passed,
    And yet a thousand thousand; years they are
    As men count years, and yet we stand and gaze
    With touching hands and lips immutable
    As mortals stand a moment; ...
    The universe is One: One Soul, One Spirit,
    One Flame, One infinite God, One infinite Love.


                SONNET TO CLYTIE.

    CLYTE, beyond all praise, thou goodliest
      Of queens, thou royal woman, crowned with tears,
      That could not move the dull stars from their spheres
    To kiss thee.  For the sun would fainter rest
    In the gold chambers of the glowing west
      Than answer thy love, thine, whose soul endears
      All souls but his, whose slow desire fears
    The fierce embraces of thine olive breast.

    O Queen, sun-lover, we are wed with thee
      In changeless love, in passion for a fire
      Whose lips bind all men in their bitter spell;
    A love whose first caress, hard won, would be
      The final dissolution of desire,
        A flame to shrivel us with fire of hell. {120A}


               A VALENTINE, '98.<<1>>

<<1. Nothing more; be it well remembered! -- A.C.>>

    NOW on the land the woods are green;
      A wild bird's note
    Shrills till the air trembles between
      His beak and throat.

    And up through blue and gold and black
      The shivering sound
    Rushes; no echo murmurs back
      From sky or ground.

    In the loud agony of song
      The moon is still;
    The wind drops down the shore along;
      Night hath her will.

    The bird becomes a dancing flame
      In leaf and bower.
    The forest trembles; loves reclaim
      Their own still hour.

    The dawn is here, and on the sands
      Where sun first flames,
    I gather lilies from all lands
      Of sad sweet names.

    The Lesbian lily is of white
      Stained through with blood,
    Swayed with the stream, a wayward light
      Upon the flood.

    The Spartan lily is of blue,
      With green leaves fresh;
    Apollo glints his crimson through
      The azure mesh.

    The English lily is of white,
      All white and clean;
    There plays a tender flame of light
      Her flowers between.

    The English lily is a bloom
      To cold and sweet;
    One might say -- in the twilight gloom
      A maiden's feet. {120B}

    Silent and slim and delicate
      The flower shall spring,
    Till there be born immaculate
      A fair new thing.

    Tall is the mother-lily, still
      By faint winds swayed;
    Tender and pure, without a will --
      An English maid.

    No tree of poison, at whose feet
      All men lie dead;
    No well of death, whose waters sweet
      Are tinged with red.

    No hideous impassioned queen
      For whom love dies;
    No warm imperious Messaline
      That slew with sighs.

    Fiercer desires may cast away
      All things most good;
    A people may forget to-day
      Their motherhood.

    She will remain, unshaken yet
      By storm and sun;
    She will remain, when years forget
      That fierier one.

    A race of clean strong men shall spring
      From her pure life.
    Men shall be happy; bards shall sing
      The English wife.

    And thou, forget thou that my mouth
      Has ever clung
    To flame of hell; that of the south
      The songs I sung.

    Forget that I have trampled flowers,
      And worn the crown
    Of thorns of roses in the hours
      So long dropped drown.

    Forget, O white-faced maid, that I
      Have dallied long
    In classic bowers and mystery
      Of classic song. {121A}

    Eros and Aphrodite now
      I can forget,
    Placing upon thy maiden brow
      Love's coronet.

    Wake from the innocent dear sleep
      Of childhood's life:
    An English maiden must not weep
      To be a wife.

    So shall out love bridge space, and bring
      The tender breath
    Of sun and moon and stars that sing
      To gladden Death.

    I see your cheek grow pale and cold,
      Then flush above.
    Kiss me; I know that I behold
      The birth of Love.


                    PENELOPE.

    ULYSSES 'scaped the sorceries of that queen
      That turned to swine his goodly company,
    And came with sails broad-burgeoning and clean
      Over the ripples of his native sea.
    Yet for the shores his eyes had lately seen,
      He kept a half-regretful memory;
    And thought, when all the flower-strewn ways were green,
      "Better love Circe than Penelope!"

    Yes.  A good woman's love will forge a chain
      To break the spirit of the bravest Greek;
    While with an harlot one may leap again
    Free as the waters of the western main,
      And turn with no heart-pang the vessel's beak
      Out to the oceans that all seamen seek. {121B}


              A SONNET OF BLASPHEMY.

    EXALTED over earth, from hell arisen,
    There sits a woman, ruddy with the flame
    Of men's blood spilt, and her uncleanly shame,
    And the thrice-venomous vomit of her prison.

    She sits as one long dead: infernal calm,
    Chill hatred, wrap her in their poisonous cold.
    She careth not, but doth disdainly hold
    Three scourges for man's soul, that know no balm

    They know not any cure.  The first is Life,
    A well of poison.  Sowing dust and dung
    Over men's hearts, the second scourge, above
    All shameful deeds, is Lying, from whose tongue
    Drops Envy, wed with Hatred, to sow Strife.

    These twain are bitter; but the last is Love.


                THE RAPE OF DEATH.

ARGUMENT. -- Sir Godfrey, a knight of Normandy, leapeth into a light vessel of Jarl Hungard, while they sit at feast, and, slaying the crew, seeketh the high seas with the Lady Thurla.  He slayeth the swiftest pursuers, and escapeth in a great tempest; which on the second day abating, he maketh the inside of a bar, and must await the breeze.  Jarl Hungard coming with his men and two dragons, is wrecked, but a knave shooting, slayeth the Lady Thurla.  Sir Godfrey forthwith sinketh the other dragon, and saileth forth into the ocean, and is not heard of ever after.<<The argument is not founded on tradition.>>

    PALE vapours like phantoms on the sea,
      The tide swells slumberous beneath our keel,
    The pulses of our canvas fail; and we {122A}

    No faint sweet summons from the south wind feel:
      The crimson waters of the west are pale,
    And bloodless arrows like a stream of steel

    Flash from the moon, that rises where the gale
      Only a day past raged; the clouds are lost
    In pleasant rains that ripple on the sail.

    The sudden fascination of the frost
      Touches the heavy canvas; now there form
    Reluctant crystals, and the vessel, tossed

    The wild night through in the devouring storm,
      Glistens with dew made sharp and bright with cold.
    For no north wind may drive us to the warm

    Long-looked-for lands where day, with plumes of gold,
      Flaps like a lazy eagle in the air;
    Where night, a bird of prey divinely bold,

    Wings through the sky, intangible but fair,
      And pale with subtle passion; and no wind
    Turns our prow southward, till the canvas bear

    No more up into it, but still behind
      Follow like flame, and lead our love along
    Into the valleys of the ocean, blind,

    But seeing all the world awake with song
      Of many lyres and lutes and reeds of straw,
    And all the rivers musical that throng

    In bright assemblage of unchanging law,
      Like many flute-players; and seeing this,
    (That all the mountains looked upon and saw)

    The sweetness of the savour of a kiss,
      And all its perfume wafter to the sky.
    Nay, but no wind will drive our fortalice {122B}

    (So strong against the sun) to where they ply
      Those pallid wings, or turn our vessel's beak
    With utmost fury to the North, to dye

    Our prows with seaweed, such as wise men seek
      For cleansing of their altars with slow blood
    Wrenched from the long dark leaves, with fingers weak

    With age and toil; to stem the restless flood
      That boils between the islands; to attain
    The ultimate ice, where some calm hero stood

    And looked one last time for a sail in vain,
      And looking upward not in vain, lay down
    And died, to pass where cold and any pain

    Are not.  So still the night is, like the crown
      Most white of the high God that glittereth!
    The stars surround the moon, and Nereids drown

    Their rippled tresses in her golden breath.
      Let us keep watch, my true love, caught at last
    Between my hands, and not remember death.

    Only bethink us of the daylight past,
      The long chase oversea, the storm, the speed
    Whereby we ran before the leaping blast,

    And left the swift pursuers at our need
      With one wrecked dragon and one shattered; yea!
    And on their swiftest many warriors bleed,

    Having beheld, above the gray seaway
      Between them and the sun, my sword arise,
    Like the first dagger flashing for the day,

    My sword, that darts among them serpentwise --
      And all their warriors fell back a space,
    And all the air rang out with sudden cries, {123A}

    Seeing the death and fury of my face,
      And feeling the long sword sweep out and kill,
    Till there was won the slippery path, the place.

    Whence I might sever the white cords, and fill
      The ship with tangled wreckage of the sail.
    All this I did, and bore the blade of ill

    Back, dripping blood, to thee most firm and pale
      Who held our rudder, all alone, and stood
    Fierce and triumphant in the rising gale,

    Bent to my sword, and kissed the stinging blood,
      While the good ship leapt free upon the deep,
    And felt the feet of the resistless flood

    Run, and the fervour of the billows sweep
      Under our keel -- and we were clean away,
    Laughing to seethe foamheads sough and sleep,

    As we kept pace with ocean all the day
      And one long night of toil; until the sun
    Lit on these cliffs his morning beams that play

    With our sails rent and rifted white, and run
      Like summer lightning all about the deck,
    And laugh upon the work my sword had done

    When the feast turned to death for us; we reck
      Nothing to-night of all that past despair:
    Only to-night I watch your curving neck,

    And play with all the kisses of your hair,
      And feel your weight, as if you were to be
    Always and always -- O my queen, how rare {123B}

    Your lips' perfume; like lilies on the sea
      Your white breasts glimmer; let us wait awhile.
    There is no breeze to drive us down to lee

    On the cold rocks of yonder icy isle,
      And your sire's passion must forget the chase
    As I forget, the moment that you smile,

    And sea and sky are brighter for your face --
      I hear the sound of many oars; perhance
    Your father's, but within this iron place

    The heavy dragons will not dare advance
      Where our light vessel barely skimmed the rock:
    Their anger may grow cool, the while they dance

    Like fools before the bard we crossed, and mock
      Pursuit.  Behold! one dragon strikes the reef,
    Breaks in the midst before the dreadful shock,

    Shattered and stricken by the rousing sheaf
      Of wild intolerable foam that breaks
    Full on their stem: she sinks.  One fierce foul thief

    Springs desperate upon her poop; she shakes;
      He strings a sudden arrow.  Ocean sweeps
    Over his cursed craft.  The arrow takes

    The straight swift road -- Ah God! -- to her who sleeps,
      To her bright bosom as at peace she lies.
    She is dead quickly, and the ocean keeps

    The secret of my sorrow from her eyes.
      I will not weep; I cannot weep; I turn
    And watch the sail fill with the wind that sighs {124A}

    A little for pure pity -- I discern
      The cowards shake with fear; the vessel springs
    Light to the breezes, as the golden erne

    That seeks a prey on its impetuous wings;
      The reef is past; I crash upon the foe,
    And all the fury of my weapon rings

    On armour temperless; the waters flow
      Through the dark rent within the side; I leap
    Back to my dead love; back, desiring so

    That they had killed me, for I cannot weep.
      They killed her, and a mist of blood consumes
    My sight; they killed my lover in her sleep.

    The breeze has freshened, and the water fumes,
      The vessel races on beneath the sky;
    Beneath her bows the eager billow spumes.

    I wonder whither, and I wonder why.
      No ray of light this sea of blood illumes.
    I wonder whether God will let me die.


            IN THE WOODS WITH SHELLEY.

    SING, happy nightingale, sing;
      Past is the season of weeping;
    Birds in the wood are on wing,
      Lambs in the meadow are leaping.
    Can there be any delight still in the buttercups sleeping?

    Dawn, paler daffodil, dawn;
      Smile, for the winter is over;
    Sunlight makes golden the lawn,
      Spring comes and kisses the clover;
    All the wild woodlands await poet and songster and lover. {124B}

    Linger, dew, linger and gem
      All the fresh flowers in the garland;
    Blossom, leaf, bud and green stem
      Flash with your light to some far land,
    Where men shall wonder if you be not a newly-born starland.

    Ah! the sweet scents of the woods!
      Ah! the sweet sounds of the heaven!
    Sights of impetuous floods,
      Foam like the daisy at even,
    Folding o'er passionate gold petals that sunrise had riven!

    See, like my life is the stream
      Now its desire is grown quiet;
    Life was a passionate dream
      Once, where light fancy ran riot,
    Now, ere youth fades, flows in peace past woody bank and green eyot.

    Highest, white heather and rock,
      Mountain and pine, with young laughter,
    Breezes that murmur and mock
      Duller delights to come after,
    Wild as a swallow that dives whither the sea wind would waft her.

    Lower, an ocean of flowers,
      Trees that are warmer and leafier,
    Starrier, sunnier hours
      Spurning the stain of all grief here,
    Bringing a quiet delight to us, beyond our belief, here.

    Lastly, the uttermost sea,
      Starred with flakes of spray sunlit,
    Blue as its caverns that be
      Crystal, resplendent, yet unlit;
    So like a mother receives the kiss of the dainty-lip runlet.

    Here the green moss is my seat,
      Beech is a canopy o`er me,
    Calm and content the retreat;
      Man, my worst foe, cannot bore me;
    Life is a closed book behind -- Shelley an open before me. {125A}

    Shelley's own birds are above
      Close to me (why should they fear me?)
    May I believe it -- that love
      Brings his bright spirit so near me
    That, should I whisper one word -- Shelley's swift spirit would hear me.

    Heaven is not very far;
      Soul unto soul may be calling
    When a swift meteor star
      Through the quick vista is falling.
    Loose but your soul -- shall its wings find the white way so appalling?

    Heaven, as I understand,
      Nearer than some folk would make it;
    God -- should you stretch our a hand,
      Who can be quicker to take it?
    Then you have pacted an oath -- judge you if He will forsake it!

    I have had hope in the spring --
      Trust that the God who has given
    Flowers, and the thrushes that sing
      Dawnwards all night, and at even
    Year after year, will be true now we are speaking of heaven.

    Breezes caress me and creep
      Over the world to admire it;
    Sweet air shall sigh me to sleep,
      Softly my lips shall respire it,
    Lying half-closed with a kiss ready for who shall desire it.


             A VISION UPON USHBA.<<1>>

<<1. A mountain in the Caucasus.  Crowley never visited this district.>>

    HERE in the wild Caucasian night,
      The sleepless years
    Seem to pass by in garments white,
      Made white with tears,
    A pageant of intolerable light
      Across the sombre spheres,
    And, mingling with the tumult of the morn,
    Methought a single rose of blood was born. {125B}

    Far on the iron peaks a voice
      Crystal and cold,
    Sharper than sounds the aurochs'<<1>> choice
      O'er wood and wold,
    A summons as of angels that rejoice,
      A paean glad and bold,
    A mighty shout of infinite acclaim
    Shrieks through the sky some dread forgotten Name.

<<1. The extinct Wild Bull of Europe. {WEH Note: No longer quite extinct; breed back from mixed stock after the time of this poem.  The same is true of some breeds of wild horses.}>>

    Trembles the demon on his perch
      Of crags ice-bound;
    Tremble near forest and far church
      At that quick sound;
    The silver arrows that bedeck the birch
      Shiver along the ground:
    Priest, fiend, and harpy answer to the call,
    And hasten to their ghastly festival.

    There in the vale below my feet
      I see the crew
    Gather, blaspheming God, and greet
      Their shame anew.
    A feast is spread of some unholy meat;
      Oftimes there murmurs through
    Their horrid ranks a cry of pain, as God
    Bids them keep memory of His iron rod.

    The vale is black with priests.  They fight,
      Wild beasts, for food,
    The orphan's gold, the widow's right,
      The virgin's snood.
    All in their maws are crammed within the night
      That hides their chosen wood,
    Where through the blackness sounds the sickening noise
    Of cannibals that gloat on monstrous joys.

    The valley steams with slaughter.  Here
      Shall the pure snow
    The bloody reek of murder rear
      To crush the foe?
    In Titan fury shall the rocks spring clear,
      And smite the fiends below?
    Shall poisonous wind and avalanche combine
    To wreck swift justice, human and divine? {126A}

    Priests thrive on poison.  Carrion
      Their eager teeth
    Tear, till the sacramental sun
    Its sword unsheath,
    And bid their horrid carnival be done,
      And smite beneath
    In their cold gasping valleys, and bid light
    Break the battalions of the angry night.

    That sword that smote from Heaven was so keen,
      Its silver blade
    No angel's sight, no fairy's eye hath seen,
      No tender maid
    With subtle insight may behold its sheen
      With light inlaid;
    But God, who forged it, breathed upon its point,
    And His pure unction did the hilt anoint.

    Within the poet's hand he laid the sword:
      With reverent ear
    The poet listened to His word
      Cleansed through of fear.
    The brightness of the glory of the Lord
      Grew adamant, a spear!
    And when he took the flachion in his hand
    Lo! kings and princes bowed to his command.

    Then shall the flag of England flaunt
      In peaceful might,
    The sceptred isle of dying Gaunt<<1>>
      Shall rule by right.
    The sons of England shall bid Hell avaunt
      And priest and harlot smite.
    Then all the forces of the earth shall be
    Untamable, a shield of Liberty.

<<1. See "Richard II.," ii. I.>>

    Freedom shall burgeon like a rose,
      While in the sky
    A new white sun with ardour glows
      On liberty.
    Men shall sing merrily at work as those
      Who fear no more to die --
    Ay! and who fear no more at last to live
    Since man can love and worship and forgive. {126B}

    Then on these heights of Caucasus
      A fire shall dwell,
    Pure as the dawn, and odorous
      Of bud and bell;
    A flower of fire, a flame from heaven to us
      All triumph to foretell,
    A glory of unspeakable delight,
    A flower like lightning, adamant and white.

    There needs no more or sun or sea
      Or any light;
    On golden wheels Eternity
      Revolves in Night.
    The island peoples are too proud and free
      And full of might
    To care for time or space, but glorious wend
    A royal path of flowers to the end.

    I pray thee, God, to weapon me
      With this keen fire,
    That I may set this people free
      As my desire;
    That the white lilies of our liberty
      Grow on Life's crags still higher,
    Till on the loftiest peaks their blossom flower,
    The rampart of a people and their power.


           ELEGY, "August" 27"th," 1898.<<1>>

<<1. When Dr. John Hopkinson and three of his children perished on the Petite Dent de Veisivi.>>

    SO have the days departed, as the leaves
      Smitten by wrath of Autumn blast;
    So the year, fallen from delight, still grieves
      Over the happy past.

    The year of barren summer, when the wind
      Blew from the south unlooked-for snow,
    The year when Collon,<<1>> desolate and blind,
      Gloomed on the vale below,

<<1. A mountain at the head of the Val d'Herens.>>

    When logs of pinewood lit the little room,
      And friendship ventured in to sit
    Beside their blaze, to listen in the gloom
      To wisdom and to wit; {127A}

    When we discussed our hopes, and told the stories
      Of happy climbing days gone by;
    The stubborn battle with the cliffs, the glories
      Of the blue Alpine sky.

    The keen delight of paths untrodden yet,
      And new steep ice and rocky ways
    Too dangerous and splendid to forget.
      Those dear strong happy days!

    And now what happier fate to your brave souls
      Than so to strive and fighting fall?
    Think you that He who sees you, and controls,
      Did not devise it all?

    The mountains that you loved have taken you,
      And we who love you will not weep.
    Shall we begrudge?  Your last look saw sky blue;
      You will be glad to sleep.

    Your pure names (thrice renowned, yours fresh with youth
      And full of promise) shall be kept
    Still in our hearts for monuments of truth,
      As if you had not slept.


                    EPILOGUE.

    HORACE, in the fruitful Sabine country,
    Where the wheat and vine are most abundant,
    Where the olive ripens in the sunshine,
    Where the streams are voiced with Dian's whispers,
    Lived in quiet, with a woman's passion
    To inspire his lute and bring contentment
    In the gray still days of early winter.
    I, remote from cities, like the poet, {127B}
    Tune my lesser lyre with other fingers,
    Yet am not a whit the less beloved.
    Unto me the stars are never silent,
    Nor do sea and storm deny their music,
    Nor do flower and breeze refuse their kisses:
    So my soul is flooded with their magic;
    So my love completes the joy of living.
    I am like the earth, to whom there gather
    Rays of gold to bid the gray horizon
    Melt, recede, and brighten into azure.
    Let me sing, O holy one, Apollo!
    Sing as Horace sang, and flood the ocean
    With a living ecstasy of music
    Till the whole creation echo, echo,
    Echo till the tune dissolve the heavens? {128A}
    Still the song lingers; lamely from the lute string
    Steals a breath of melody; the forest
    Treasures in its glades the sighs I utter.
    Yet may I be happy, storing honey
    Lover's lips hold, gathering the sunlight
    Eyes and hair have kept for me, delighting
    In the bells far-off, in yonder thrushes,
    In the tawny songster of the forest,
    In the stream's song, all the words of passion,
    Echoes of the deeper words unspoken
    In thy breast and mine, O heart of silence!
    Will they pierce one day to other nations
    Clear and strong and triumphing?
                                     It may be.
    Then we shall not envy you, my Horace! {128

{{full page below}






                                   JEZEBEL;

                           AND OTHER TRAGIC POEMS.

                        BY COUNT VLADIMIR SVAREFF.<<1>>

       Edited, with an Introduction and Epilogue, by ALEISTER CROWLEY.

                                    1899.

<<1. Under this name the poet lay perdu in the heart of London, prosecuting, under circumstances of romantic and savage interest, his first occult studies.>>

                              {col. start below}


                    DEDICACE.

                                LONDRES, "Juin" 1898.

    PEINTRE, que ton amour inspire
      Des chansons toujours plus sublimes,
    Malgre qu'aujourd'hui ma mauvaise lyre
                 Chante l'abime.

    Nos espoirs, nos desirs nous rendent
      Des amis chers aux dieux;
    Demain, ma voix, plus haute et plus profonde,
                Chante les cieux.
                                  A GERALD.<<1>>

<<1. Gerald Kelly, the eminent painter.>>


                     PERDITA.

    LIKE leaves that fall before the sullen wind
      At summer's parting kiss and autumn's call,
    Lost thoughts fly half-forgotten from my mind,
      Like leaves that fall.

    They shall not come again; the wintry pall
      Of consciousness clouds o'er them; they shall find
    No rest, no hope, no tear, no funeral.

    Into the night, despairing, bleeding, blind,
      They pass, nor know their former place at all,
    Lost to my soul, to God, to all mankind,
        Like leaves that fall. {129A}


                     JEZEBEL.

                     PART I.

    A LION'S mane, a leopard's skin
      Across my dusty shoulders thrown;
    A swart fierce face, with eyes where sin
      Lurks like a serpent by a stone.
    A man driven forth by lust to seek
    Rest from himself on Carmel's peak.

    A prophet<<1>> with wild hair behind,
      Streaming in fiery clusters!  Yea,
    Tangled with vehemence of the wind,
      And knotted with the tears that slay;
    And all my face parched up and dried,
    And all my body crucified.

<<1. Not Elijah, as the sequel shows.  Foolish contemporary reviews, however, made this silly blunder.>>

    Ofttimes the Spirit of the Lord
      Descends and floods me with his breath;
    My words are fashioned as a sword,
      My voice is like the voice of death.
    The thunder of the Spirit's wings
    Brings terror to the hearts of kings.

    Anon, and I am driven out
      In desert places by desire;
    My mouth is salt and dry; I doubt
      If hell hath such another fire;
    If God's damnation can devise
    A lust to match these agonies. {129B}

    The desert wind my body burns,
      The voice of flesh consumes my soul;
    My body towards the city turns,
      My spirit seeks its fierier goal;
    In wells of heaven to quench my thirst,
    And take God's hand among the first.

    I conquered self; I grew at last
      A prophet chosen of the Lord;
    I blew the trumpet's iron blast
      That called on Zimri Omri's sword;
    My voice inflamed the fiery steel
    That was to smite upon Jezreel.

    And now, I haste from yonder sands,
      With fervour filled, to say God's doom
    To Ahab of the bloody hands,
      The spoiler of his father's tomb,
    The slayer of the vineyard king.
    God's judgment, and his fate, I bring.

    The city gleams afar,; I see
      Samarina's white walls on high;
    The mountains echo back to me
      The vengeful murmur of the sky;
    All heaven and earth on me attend
    To prophesy the tyrant's end.

    The gates are close because of night
      Whose heavy breath infects the air;
    The dog-star gleams, a devilish light:
    I thought I saw behind me glare
    The eyes of fiends.  I thought I heard
    An evil laugh, a mocking word.

    The gates swing open at the Name,
      Without a warder roused from sleep;
    I pass, with face of burning flame,
      That is not quenched, although I weep.
    (For even my tears are tears of fire,
    For loathing, madness, and desire.)

    Ah God! the traps for fervent feet!
      The morrow beaconed, and I came
    By where the golden groves of wheat
      In summer glories fiercely flame;
    To those white courts, by princes trod,
    Where Ahab sat, and mocked at God. {130A}

    Where Ahab sat: -- but lo!  I saw
      No king, no tyrant to be curst;
    But she, who filled me with blind awe,
      She, for whose blood my thin veins thirst;
    The blossom of a painted mouth
    And bare breasts tinctured with the south.

    For lo! the harlot Jezebel!
      Her hands dropped perfume, and her tongue
    (A flame from the dark heart of hell,
      The ivory-barred mouth, that stung
    With unimaginable pangs)
    Shot out at me, and Hell fixed gangs.

    Her purple robes, her royal crown,
      The jewelled girdle of her waist,
    Her feet with murder splashed, and brown
      With the sharp lips that fawn and taste,
    The crimson snakes that minister
    To those unwearying lust of her.

    And all her woman's scent did drift
      A steam of poison through the air;
    The haze of sunshine seems to lift
      And toil in tangles of black hair,
    The hair that waves, and winds, and bites,
    And glistens with unholy lights.

    For lo! she saw me, and beheld
      My trembling lips curled back to curse,
    Laughed with strong scorn, whose music knelled
      The empire of God's universe.
    And on my haggard face upturned
    She spat!  Ah God! how my cheek burned!

    Then, as a man betrayed, and doomed
      Already, I arose and went,
    And wrestled with myself, consumed
      With passion for that sacrament
    Of shame.  From the day unto this
    My cheek desires that hideous kiss. {130B}

    Her hate, her scorn, her cruel blows,
      Fill my whole life, consume my breath;
    Her red-fanged hatred in me glows,
      I lust for her, and hell, and death.
    I see that ghastly look, and yearn
    Toward the brands of her that burn.

    Sleep shuns me; dreams divide the night,
      (My parched throat thirsty for her veins)
    That she and I with deep delight
      Suck from death's womb infernal pains,
    Whose fire consumes, destroys, devours
    Through night's insatiable hours.

    And altogether filled with love,
      And altogether filled with sin,
    The little sparks and noises move
      About the softness of her skin.
    Her pleasures and her passions purr
    For the delight I have of her.

    Aching with all the pangs of night
      My shuddering body swoons; my eyes
    Absorb her eyelids' lazy light,
      And read her bosom to devise
    Fresh blossoms of the heart of hell
    And secret joys of Jezebel.

    Her lips are fastened to my breast
      To suck out blood in feverish tides;
    The token of her I possessed,
      Still on my withered cheek abides.
    Thus slowly the desire grows
    To kill and have her yet -- who knows?


                     PART II.

    I know.  When Ramoth-Gilead's field
      Grew bloody with hot ranks of dead,
    I smote amain with sword and shield;
      My brows with mingled blood were red;
    And on my cheek the kiss of hell,
    The hatred of my Jezebel. {131A}

    I waited many days.  At last
      The rushing of a chariot grew
    Frightful through all the city vast:
      Men were afraid.  But I -- I knew
    Jehu was here, whose sword should dip
    Deep in my love's adulterous lip.

    The spirit filled me.  "And behold!
      I saw her dead stare to the skies.
    I came to her; she was not cold,
      But burning with old infamies.
    On her incestuous mouth I fell,
    And lost my soul for Jezebel."

    I followed him afoot, afire;
      Beneath her window he drew rein;
    She looked forth, clad in glad attire,
      Haggard and hateful, once again;
    And taunted him.  His bastard blood
    Quailed, but his violent soul withstood.

    He blenched, and then with eyes of flame,
      "Who is on my side?  Who?" he said.
    Three eunuchs, passionless, grown tame,
      Grinned from behind her laughing head.
    "Throw down that woman!"  And my breath
    Caught as they flung her out to death.

    I think I died that moment.  He,
      Foaming for vengeance and blood-lust,
    Laughed his coarse laugh of hideous glee.
      Her sweet bad body in the dust
    He trampled.  Royal from the womb
    A martyred murderess lacks a tomb!

    A tigress woman, clad with sin,
      And shod with infamy, who pressed
    The bloody winepress of my skin,
      And plucked the purple of my breast --
    Her lovers in their hearts shall keep
    Her memory passionate and deep.

    They cast her forth on Naboth's field
      Still living, in her harlot's dress;
    Her belly stript, her thighs concealed,
      For shame's sake and for love's no less.
    Night falls; the gaping crowds abide
    No longer by her stiffening side. {131B}

    I crept like sleep toward the place
      That held for me her evil head;
    I bent like sin above her face
      That dying she might kiss me dead.
    I whispered "Jezebel!"  She turned,
    And her deep eyes with hatred burned.

    "Ah! prophet, come to mock at me
      And gloat on mine exceeding pain?"
    "Nay, but to give my soul to thee,
      And have thee spit at me again!"
    She smiled -- I know she smiled -- she sighed,
    Bit my lips through, and drank, and died!

    Her murders and her blasphemies,
      Her whoredoms, God has paid at last;
    Upon my bosom close she lies;
      Her carnal spirit holds me fast.
    My blood, my infamy, my pain,
    Seal my subjection and her reign.

    My veins poured out her marriage cup,
      For holy water her cruel tongue;
    For blessing of white hands raised up,
      These perfumed infamies unsung;
    For God's breath, her sharp tainted breath;
    For marriage bed, the bed of death.

    The hounds that scavenge, fierce and lean,
      Snarl in the moonlight; in the sky
    The vulture hangs, a ghost unclean;
      The lewd hyaena's sleepless eye
    Darts through the distance; these admit
    My lordship over her -- and it.

    The host is lifted up.  Behold
      The vintage spilt, the broken bread!
    I feast upon the cruel cold
      Pale body that was ripe and red.
    Only, her head, her palms, her feet,
    I kissed all night, and did not eat.

    So, and not otherwise, the word
      Of God was utterly fulfilled.
    So, and not otherwise.  I heard
      Her spirit cry, by death not stilled:
    "My sin is perfect in thy blood,
    And thou and I have conquered God." {132A}

    Now let me die, at last desired,
      At last beloved of thee my queen;
    Now let me die, with blood attired,
      Thy servant naked and obscene;
    To thy white skull, thy palms, thy feet,
    Clinging, dead, infamous, complete.

    Now let me die, to mix my soul
      With thy red soul, to join our hands,
    To weld us in one perfect whole,
      To link us with desirous bands.
    Now let me die, to mate in hell
    With thee, O harlot Jezebel.


             CONCERNING CERTAIN SINS.

    SOME sins assume a garb so fine and white
      That the blue veil of Heaven seems to shade
    Their purity.  They are winged so wide and bright
      That even angels' pinions seem to fade,
    And the archangel's wing recedes in night: --
      Ay! even God seems perturbed and afraid
    Because it wears so holy a garb of light
      Of perfumed fire immaculately made.

    These sins are deadly. God is merciless
      For Love that joins Man's passion with His power,
      And makes to bloom on earth a fairer flower
    Than heaven bears.  Our token of success
      Is that displeasure toward our sin unnamed
      Of a fierce demon jealous and ashamed.


               A SAINT'S DAMNATION.

    YOU buy my spirit with those peerless eyes
      That burn my soul; you loose the torrent stream
    Of my desire; you make my lips your prize,

    And on them burns the whole life's hope: you deem
      You buy a heart; but I am well aware
    How my damnation dwells in that supreme {132B}

    Passion to feed upon your shoulders hare,
      And pass the dewy twilight of our sin
    In the intolerable flames of hair

    That clothe my body from your head; you win
      The devil's bargain; I am yours to kill,
    Yours, for one kiss; my spirit for your skin!

    O bitter love, consuming all my will!
      O love destroying, that hast drained my life
    Of all those fountains of dear blood that fill

    My heart!  O woman, would I call you wife?
      Would I content you with one touch divine
    To flood your spirit with the clinging strife

    Of perfect passionate joy, the joy of wine,
      The drunkenness of extreme pleasure, filled
    From sin's amazing cup?  Oh, mine, mine, mine,

    Mine, if your kisses maddened me or killed,
      Mine, at the price of my damnation deep,
    Mine, if you will, as once your glances willed!

    Take me, or break me, slay or sooth to sleep,
      If only yours one hour, one perfect hour,
    Remembrance and despair and hope to steep

    In the infernal potion of that flower,
      My poisonous passion for your blood!  Behold!
    How utterly I yield, how gladly dower

      Our sin with my own spirit's quenched gold,
      Clothe Love with my own soul's immortal power,
    Give thee my body as a fire to hold --
      O love, no words, no songs -- your breast my bower! {133A}


                       LOT.

      "And while he lingered ... they brought him forth, and set him without
    the city." - GEN. xix. 16.

    TURN back from safety: in my love abide,
    Whose lips are warm as when, a virgin bride,
    I clung to thee ashamed and very glad,
    Whose breasts are lordlier for the pain they had,
    Whose arms cleave closer than thy spouse's own,
    Thy spouse -- O lover, kiss me, and atone!
    All my veins bleed for love, my ripe breasts beat
    And lay their bleeding blossoms at thy feet!
    Spurn me no more!  O bid these strangers go;
    Turn to my lips till their cup overflow;
    Hurt me with kisses, kill me with desire,
    Consume me and destroy me with the fire
    Of bleeding passion straining at the heart,
    Touched to the core by sweetnesses that smart;
    Bitten by fiery snakes, whose poisonous breath
    Swoons in the midnight, and dissolves to death!
    Ah! let me perish so, and not endure
    Thy falsehood who have known thy love was sure,
    Built up by sighs a palace of long years --
    Lo! it was faery, and the spell of tears
    Dissolves it utterly.  O bid them go,
    These white-faced boys, where calmer rivers flow
    And birds less passionate invoke the spring
    Or seek their loves with weaker, wearier wing.
    Turn back from safety!  Let God's rivers pour
    Brimstone and fire, and all his fountains roar
    Lava and hail of hell upon my head,
    So be he leave us altogether dead,
    Burnt in that shameful whirlwind of his ire,
    Consumed in one tall pyramid of fire {133B}
    Whose bowers of flame shall tell the sky of God
    How we despised his feet with thunder shod,
    And conquered, clasping, all the host of death.
    Turn to me, touch me, mix thy very breath
    With mine to mingle floods of fiery dew
    With flames of purple, like the sea shot through
    With golden glances of a fiercer star.
    Turn to me, bend above me, you may char
    These olive shoulders with an old-time kiss,
    And fix thy mouth upon me for such bliss
    Of sudden rage rekindled.  Turn again,
    And make delight the minister of pain,
    And pain the father of a new delight.
    And light a lamp of torture for the night
    Too grievous to be borne without a cry
    To rend the very bowels of the sky
    And make the archangel gasp -- a sudden pang,
    Most like a traveller stricken by the fang
    Of the black adder whose squat head springs up,
    A flash of death, beneath a cactus cup.
    Ah turn! my bosom for thy love is cold;
    My arms are empty, and my lips can hold
    No converse with thee far away like this.
    O for that communing pregnant with a kiss
    That is reborn when lips are set together
    To link our souls in one desirous tether,
    And wield our very bodies into one.
    Ah fiend Jehovah, what then have we done
    To earn thy curse -- is love like ours too strong
    To dwell before thee, and do thy throne no wrong?
    Art thou grown jealous of the fiery band?
    Lo! thou hast spoken, and thy strong command
    Bade earth and air divide, and on the sea
    Thy spirit moved -- and thou must envy me!
    Gird all thy godhead to destroy a man
    Whose little moment is a single span,
    Whose small desire is nothing -- and thy power
    Must root from out his bosom the fair flower {134A}
    Of passion!  Listen to thine own voice yet;
    "A rich man many flocks and herds did get
    And took the poor man's lamb."  Thou art the man!
    Our love must lie beneath thy bitter ban!
    Thou petty, envious God!  My king, be sure
    His brute force shall not to the end endure;
    Some stronger soul than thine shall wrest his crown
    And thrust him from his own high heaven down
    To some obscure forgetful hell.  For me
    Forsake thy hopes in him!  We worship, we,
    Rather the dear delights we know and hold;
    The first cool kiss, within the water cold
    That draws its music from some bubbling well,
    Looks long, looks deadly, looks desirable,
    The touch that fires, the next kiss, and the whole
    Body embracing, symbol of the soul,
    And all the perfect passion of an hour.
    Turn to me, pluck that amaranthine flower,
    And leave the doubtful blossoms of the sky!
    You dare not kiss me! dare not draw you nigh
    Lest I should lure you to remain! nor speak
    Lest you should catch the blood within your cheek
    Mantling.  You dared enough -- so long ago! --
    When to my bossom body clean as snow
    You pressed your bosom till desire was pain,
    And - then - that midnight - you did dare remain
    Though all my limbs were bloody with your mouth
    That tore their flesh to satiate its drouth,
    That was not thereby satisfied!  And now
    A pallid coward, with sly, skulking brow,
    You must leave Sodom for your spouse's sake
    Coward and coward and coward! who would take
    The best flower of my life and leave me so,
    Still loving you -- Ah! weak -- and turn to go {134B}
    For fear of such a God!  O blind!  O fool!
    To heed these strangers, and to be the tool
    Of their smooth lies and monstrous miracles!
    O break this bondage and cast off their spells!
    Fire righteous!  Thou a righteous man!  A jest!
    A righteous man -- you always loved me best,
    And even when lured by lips of wanton girls
    Would turn away and sigh and touch my curls
    And slip half-conscious to the old embrace: --
    And now you will not let me see your face
    Or hear your voice or touch you.  Ah! the hour!
    He moves.  Come back, come back, my life's one flower!
    Come back. One kiss before your leave me.  So!
    Stop -- turn -- one little kiss before you go;
    It is my right - you must.  Oh no!  Oh no! {135A}


                    EPILOGUE.

    To die amid the blossoms of the frost
      On far fair heights; to sleep the quiet sleep
      Of dead men underneath the snowy steep
    Of many mountains; ever to have lost
    These cares and these distrusts; to lie alone,
      Watched by the distant eagle's drowsy wing,
      Stars and grey summits, and the winds that sing
    Slow dirges in eternal monotone.

    Such is my soul's desire, being weary of
      This vain eternity of sleepless dreams
      That is my life; withal there still may be
    In other worlds, the hope of other love
      That this that floods my veins with poisonous streams,
      And wastes with wan desire the soul of me.  {135B}







                     AN APPEAL TO THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC.

                                    1899.

{columns resume}


    THOU fair Republic oversea afar,
      Where long blue ripples lap the fertile land,
    Whose manifest dominion, like a star,
    Fixed by the iron hands and swords of war,<<1>>
      Now must for aye, a constellation, stand --
    Thou new strong nation! as the eagle aspires
           To match the sun's own fires,
    Children of our land, hear the children of your sires.

<<1. This poem was written shortly after the Spanish war.>>

    We stretch out hands to-day when the white wings
      Of Peace are spread beneath you and your foe.
    O race of men that slay the slaves of kings!
    We, whom the foam-crowned ocean still enrings,
      We, whose strong freedom never brooked a blow,
    Hail you now victors, hail you of the sword
           Proved in the west the lord,
    Hail you, and bid you sound quick friendship and accord.

    The eagle of your emblem would not stoop
      To the proud vaults of that outrageous wing
    That Bismark reared, and strengthened, and bade swoop
    Fierce upon France, whose pallid pinions droop
      To own an Emperor where she mocked a king: {136A}
    Their challenge you hurled back across the foam:
           Vienna and tall Rome
    Trembled for their ally: you stirred our hearts at home.

    The fire of love no waters shall devour;
      The faith of friendship stands the shocks of time;
    Seal with our voice the triumph of this hour,
    Your glory to our glory and our power,
      Alliance of one tongue, one faith, one clime!
    Seal and clasp hands; and let the sea proclaim
           Friendship of righteous fame,
    And lordship of two worlds that time can never tame.

    Stoop not and tender not an hour's regret
      For those wild words in trivial anger passed:
    Forget your fools, as we their words forget,
    And join our worlds in one amazing net
      Of empire and dominion, till aghast
    The lying Russian cloke his traitor head
           More close, since Spain has bled
    To wake in us the love that lay a century dead.

    Let all the world keep silence at our peace;
      Let France retreat and Russia step aside
    From their encroachments, bid their envy cease
    Stricken by Fear, who see our strength increase
      By comradeship that quickens to abide,
    A bond of justice, light, and liberty,
           To make the wide earth free
    As the wild waves that slake the passion of the sea. {136B}

    Let all the world keep silence and behold
      The wrath of two great nations that are friends
    Against who bartered Poland, and who sold
    Italy, weighed out Hungary for gold,
      And shattered Greece to serve no noble ends.
    The traitors and the peoples and the kings
           That love not righteous things;
    They shall behold our wrath, and find our anger stings.

    White slaves shall look up and behold a light
      Grow in the islands of the sacred sea,
    And on the land whose forehead kisses night
    And has the dawn upon its wings, whose might
      Is mightier for the lips of Liberty
    Pressed on its new-born cheeks, when Church and State
           Drove forth to baffle Fate
    Our sires and yours, whose fame is grown this year so great.

    That morning of deliverance is at hand;
      The world requickens, and all folk rejoice,
    Seeing our kingdom look toward your land,
    And both catch hands, indissolubly grand
      In the proud friendship of a better choice.
    Your winds that wrought wild wreckage of our shore
           Shall sink and be no more,
    Or waft your barks, with wheat gold-laden swiftly o'er.

    Our foamcaps, that your rocks disdainful flung
      Back to the waves that left our beaten coast,
    Shall be like echoes of sweet songs unsung,
    And all the ocean noises find a tongue
      To voice the clamour of a righteous boast --
    That friendship and dominion shall be wrought
           Out of the womb of thought,
    And all the bygone days be held for things of nought. {137/a}

    What matter though our fathers did you wrong?
      Though brave sons brake our bitter yoke?  Though we
    Strove to compel you to a cruel thong?
    What, though the stronger did defeat the strong?
      Both, wild and patient as the steep strong sea?
    What matter that some strive to waken hate,
           Traitors to either state,
    Hang them in chains!  Our way to Freedom cannot wait!

    The petty partisans of party war,
      The hireling quillmen, and the jingo crowd,
    The well-paid patriots, scenting from afar
    Silence, their doom -- shall they eclipse the star
      Now crescent in the sky, whose music loud
    Rejoices humble hearts and true men all,
           And sounds the funeral
    Dirge of slave, tyrant, priest, that snarl, and snarling fall?

    These we forget -- remembering only this:
      Ye are blood-brothers, and our tongues are one;
    Our hopes and conquests in one splendid kiss
    Unite and struggle not for empire.  Is
      Our land and yours too little for the sun
    To gladden, to illume, to bid increase,
           Bound by two mighty seas
    In one fraternal clasp of admirable peace?

    Ye are our brothers; ye have spurned the power
      That bound the islands of your eastern shore;
    Ye have restored to freedom that fair flower,
    Cuba, in her most agonising hour,
      And east and west have thundered with red war.
    We freed us from the slavery of Spain,
           And laid upon the main
    Our hand three centuries back -- and ye have struck again. {137B}

    Priestcraft and tyranny in this defeat
      Shake, and the walls of hell with fear resound;
    The sun laughs gladlier on the heavier wheat,
      Because the fates must weave a winding-sheet
      At last for Fear.  Deliverers are found
    Who will deliver.  Mountain, stream, and brake,
           Lone wood, and sleepy lake,
    Are peopled with bright shapes that sing for freedom's sake.

    Rocks, and pale fountains, and tall trees that quiver,
       And all the clouds that deck the sunset sky
    Move like the music of a mighty river
    Where ripples break,and rapids gleam and shiver,
      And calm rebuilds her empire by-and-by.
    For joy of this alliance all the earth
           Forgets her day of dearth,
    In her new birth forgets, and maddens into mirth.

    The stars swing censers of pale gold to God,
      Whose incense is the love-song of the free;
    Angels with mercy and with beauty shod
    Move in the mazes of an Eden, trod
      Not by the seemly spirits of the sea,
    But by brave men built wholly of desire
           And freedom's mystic fire,
    To clothe its habitants with glorious attire.

    Clasp hands, O fair republic of the west,
      And leave the kingdoms to their sudden fate.
    With new-born love and ardour unrepressed,
    Let Lethe steep in its unquiet rest
      The old years whose red hands have made us great.
    O fair republic, strong and swift, unbind
           The shackles of thy mind:
    More than our kin ye are; henceforth not less than kind. {138A}

    Bind on the splendid sandals, and unloose
      The burning horses, and fling wide the reins!
    From cold Archangel unto Syracuse
    Europe shall see and tremble and ask truce,
      And new blood pour through Asia's wasted veins.
    Our Empire from Guiana to Hong Kong,
           In your new love made strong,
    Shall last while earth is glad because of sun and song.

    And O! ye desert places of the sea,
      Ye plains and mountains rugged with the wind,
    And all ye hollow caverns whence there flee
    Foam-heads and blusterous waves, give ear to me,
      And O thou thunder, follow hard behind!
    O womb of night, reverberate these chords,
           Ye clouds, ye stormy lords,
    With clamour and shrill voice as of ten thousand swords.

    Swords that clang sharp on heaven's anvil, white
      With heat of God's own forehead that beholds
    The building broken that is made of might,
    Nor builded firm on justice' iron height,
      Nor is not cast in mercy's sliver mould: --
    Swords sharp to slay, when vengeance must its fill
           Drink of the bloody rill
    Wherein men lave their mouths, arise and smite and kill.

    Listen all lands, and wonder!  For the night
      Rolls back her beaten iron, and the day
    Breaks, and the passionate heralds of the light,
    Armoured with love for panoply of might,
      Rush on the portals of the falling way.
    The lamps of heaven are dim while swords strike fire
           From rocks whose crests burn higher: --
    At their assault hell's dogs gasp, totter, and expire {138B}

    All the gold gates re open of the East;
      The rugged columns of the hills uphold
    A dome of changeless turquoise, and they feast,
    The sun's lips, on the woods that have increased
      Since dawn with store of unimagined gold.
    The steam of many exhalations fair
           Sweetens the midday air;
    Echo and tree and bud chant and give birth and bear.

    The broad Pacific brightens into blue,
      And coral isles are white with beating flame
    Of living water on their strand, live through
    With million flames candescent as the dew,
      Red flowers too queenly for a mortal name!
    The sea is pregnant with green stars; the land,
           The sky, like lovers stand
    With kiss half-consciously exchanged, hand fast in hand.

    O lovers fair and free, the wings of peace
      Bear this voice onward; linger as your will
    By moon-wrought glades, and softly murmuring seas,
    Lands white with summer, and the quiet leas!
      Linger, and let no word of music thrill
    Your hearts; young love is all the harp ye need:
           Your kiss in very deed
    Is keen to echo song well tuned from Milton's reed.

    O lovers, and ye happy groves that hear
      Their whispers, and ye vales that know their feet,
    And all ye mountains that incline your ear
    To the still murmur of the love-lorn sphere,
      And all ye caves their murmurs who repeat;
    Your music throbs in unison with mine;
           The world is flushed with wine
    Bubbling from Freedom's well, warm, luminous, divine. {139A}

    Burn, changeful purple of the vine's cool stream!
      Burn, like the sunset of a stormy sky
    When white winds gather, and white horses gleam
    Upon the ocean, and the meadows steam
      With haze of thunder, when the crimson eye
    Dips, and deep darkness falls and lies, and breaks
           In lightning's awful flakes,
    When thunder unto thunder calls and the storm awakes.

    With maddening hoofs, ye coursers of the sun,
      Spurn the reverberant air and paw the day,
    Make east and west indissolubly one,
    And night fall beaten, for its day is spun,
      And bid light gird its sword to thigh, display
    The shield of heaven's blue, and call the deep
           To watch the warrior sleep
    Of two fast friends that wake only if brave men weep.

    Wake, western land so fair, and this shall be!
      Speak and accomplish, let no ardour slip,
    A sullen hound, ad be brought shamefully
    Back, and resurge the tremor of the sea,
      And spoil a perfect kiss from free land's lip.
    Of fair free sister country, for our sake,
           Who at thy side would break
    All bars, all bonds, and bid the very dead awake.

    Are not our veins made purple with our blood,
      And our dominions touch they not afield?
    Pours not the sea its long exultant flood
    On either's coast?  The rose has one same bud,
      And the vine's heart one purple pledge doth yield.
    Are we not weary of the fanged pen?
           Are we not friends, and men?
    Let us look frankly face to face -- and quarrel then! {139B}

    For by the groves of green and quiet ways,
      And on the windy reaches of the river,
    In moonlit night and blue unbroken days,
    And where the cold ice breaks in pallid bays,
      And where dim dawns in frosty forest shiver;
    Where India burns and far Australia glows;
           Where cactus blooms, where rose,
    Let our hearts' beat be heard, to lighten many woes.

    Sister and daughter of our loyal isle,
      Our hands reach out to you, our lips are fain
    To wreathe with yours in one delicious smile
    Of budding love, to grow a kiss awhile,
      And laugh like bride and groom, and kiss again!
    Let our alliance like a marriage stand,
           Supreme from strand to strand,
    The likeness of our love, the clasp of hand in hand.

    And men who come behind us yet unborn,
      Nor dimly guessed at down the brook of time,
    Shall celebrate the brave undying morn
    When the free nations put aside their scorn
      For friendship, rock no sundering surge may climb, {140A}
    When their strong hands gripped hard across the sea,
           Flushed with fresh victory,
    Lands royal, leal, and great, vast beautiful, and free.

    Our children's children shall unsheathe the sword
      Against the envy of some tyrant power:
    The leader of your people and our lord
    Shall join to wrest fro slavery abhorred
      Some other race, a fair storm-ruined flower!
    O fair republic, lover and sweet friend,
           Your loyal hand extend,
    Let freedom, peace and faith grow stronger to the end!

    O child of freedom, thou art very fair!
      Thou hast white roses on thy eager breast,
    The scent of all the South is in thy hair,
    Thy lips are fragrant with the blossoms rare
      Blown under sea waves when the white wings rest!
    Come to our warrior breast, where victory
           Sits passionate and free --
    Ring out the wild salute!  Our sister over sea! {140B}


{full page below}






                             THE FATAL FORCE.<<1>>

<<1. This play deals with the effect of shattering all the solid bases of a young man's mind.  Here we find him strong enough to win through.  In the "Mother's Tragedy" is a similar case with a weaker nature.  It is well to note that in the former play the mother is evil; in the latter good.  Hence also in part the tragedy.  For a good mother is an affliction against which none by the strongest may strive.  It is fortunately rare.>>

                                    1899.

                                          "She
             In the habilments of the goddess Isis
               That day appeared." -- "Anthony and Cleopatra," iii, 6, 16

  "Stoop not down, for a precipice lieth beneath the earth, reached by a descending ladder which hath Seven Steps, and therein is established the throne of an evil and fatal force." -- ZOROASTER.  {col. start below}

                     "PEOPLE."

        RATOUM, "Queen of Egypt."
        THE LEPER, "her divorced husband."
        KHOMSU, "their son" (dead).
        S'AFI, "son of" KHOMSU "and" RATOUM.
        THE KING OF SYRIA.
        AMENHATEP, "High Priest."
        Chorus of Priests.
        Soldiers of Egypt.
        Syrian Troops.

                      S'AFI.

    WHY is thy back made stiff, unrighteous priest,
    Thy knee reluctant?  Thine old eyes, grown blind,
    Stare into silence, and behold no god
    Longer.  Thy forehead knows no reverence
    Nor sign of worship.  Or sits mutiny
    Blasphemous on thy brows?  For in thine eyes
    I see full knowledge, and some glittering fire
    Lurks in the rheumy corners; yea, some fire
    Malignant, terrible -- nay, pitiable,
    Thou poor fool stricken with senility,
    How spurred to passion?  Yet behold thy god, {141A}
    Horus, lest anger take benignancy
    From his left hand and smite thee with his strength.
    Thou hearest?  Nay, thou pitiful old man,
    For I have loved thee.  yet my godhead must
    Get Worship.  Anger not the god, but stoop,
    My faithful priest, and worship at my feet.

                    AMENHATEP.

    I am most miserable.  But truth must leap
    In this tremendous moment from my lips,
    Its long-shut barrier.  For I pity thee
    With my old heart's whole pity.  Thou art young,
    And beautiful, and proud, and dear to me,
    Whom I have served thy life through.  Now that love
    Demands a deadlier service -- to speak truth.
    Thou art not Horus, but a man as I.

                     CHORUS.

    Thou art not Horus, but a man.  Thy life
    Is not of the immortals, but, as ours,
    Stands at the summons of the hooded death. {141B}

                      S'AFI.

    Speak!  I have this much of a god in me --
    I am not shaken at your cries; my lips
    Are silent at your blasphemy; my ears
    Are strong to hear if there be truth at all
    In your mixed murmurs: I command you, speak!

                    AMENHATEP.

    The burden of the madness of the Queen
    Lies on the land: the Syrian is near;
    And she, believing that her godhead guards
    Her people, sleeps.  The altars are thrown down;
    The people murmur.  She hath done thee wrong,
    But be thou mighty to avenge!

                      S'AFI.

                                   To-day
    I, Horus, shall become Osiris.  Yea,
    Strange secret dreams of some mysterious fate
    Godlike have come upon me, and the throne
    Totters for your disloyalty.

                    AMENHATEP.

                               Beware!
    How died thy father?

                      S'AFI.

                             That amazing god
    Incarnate in him chose a nobler form,
    And in my mother's body sought his home,
    Whose double incarnation is divine
    Beyond the old stories.  Yes, I am a god.

                    AMENHATEP.

    Beware the fatal magic of her heart!
    For she is great and evil, and her voice
    Howls blasphemy against yet living gods.
    Thou knowest not the story of thy birth,
    The truth. {142A}

                      S'AFI.

            Then speak the truth, if so a priest
    May tune his tongue to anything but lies.

                    AMENHATEP.

    Sixteen strange seasons mingle gold and grey
    Since in this very temple she, the Queen,
    Spake, and threw open to our reverent gaze
    A royal womb made pregnant with that seed
    Of which thou art the harvest.  She spake thus:
    "Princes, and people of the Egyptian land,
    And broken priests of broken deities
    Discrowned this hour, look up, behold your god!
    For I am pregnant with my own son's child,
    The fruit of my desire's desire.  Most pure,
    The single spirit of my godhead yearned
    From death to reap dominion, and from birth
    To pluck the blossom of its fruitful love,
    And be the sun to ripen and the rain
    To water it.  My soul became the bride
    To its own body, and my body leapt
    With passion from mine own imperial loins
    Begotten, and made strong from my own soul
    To answer it.  I hail thee, son of mine,
    Thou royal offspring of a kingly sire,
    Less kingly for the single flower of love!
    I hail thee, son, the secret spouse of me,
    King of my body and this realm to-day!
    For lo! the child leapt up within my womb,
    Hailing me mother, and my spirit leapt,
    Hailing him brother!  Son and spouse and king,
    Exulting father of the royal soul
    That lies here, loving me, assume thy crown
    And sit beside me, equal to thy queen.
    For look ye to the burning south, and see
    The sun grown amorous, and behold his fire
    Leap to my godhead.  For without a man
    I single, I the mother, have conceived
    Of my own loins, and made me no less god
    Than all your gods!  Ye people and ye priests,
    Behold the burden of my life, and fear, {142B}
    And know me Isis.  Worship me, and praise
    The goodliest ruler of the world, the queen
    Of all the white immeasurable seas,
    And that vast river of our sowing-time,
    And of your Sun.  Behold me made a god
    Of my own godhead, and adore the sun
    Of my queen's face, and worship ye the fount
    And fertile river of my life.  Bow down,
    Ye people and ye priests, and worship me,
    And him co-equal.  I am very god!"
    So spake the Queen; but I arose and said:

    "Queen and our lord, we worship!  Let the smoke
    Of this divinest incense be a smell
    Sweet to thy nostrils!  For three times I cast
    Its faint dust in the tripod, and three times
    The smoke of adoration has gone up
    To greet our gods; for the old gods are dead."

    Then there came forth a leper in the hall,
    In the most holy temple.  So amazed
    All shrank.  And he made prophecy and said:
    "The child that shall be born of thee is called
    Fear.<<1>>  He shall save a people from their sin;
    For the old gods indeed go down to death,
    But the new gods arise from rottenness."
    Then said the goddess: "I indeed am pure
    In my impurity; immaculate
    In misconception; maiden in my whoredom;
    Chaste in my incest, being made a god
    Through my own strength."  The leper with smooth words
    Turned, and went laughingly towards the west,
    And took of his own leprosy and threw
    Its foul flakes in the censer.  So he passed,
    Laughing, and on the altar the flame fell,
    Till a great darkness was upon the room,
    And only the Queen's eyes blazed out.  So all {143A}
    Silently went, and left her naked there,
    Crowned, sceptred, and exultant, till a chant
    Rolled from her moving lips; and great fear fell
    Upon us, and the flame lept, and we fled,
    Worshipping.  but the mood passed, and we see
    A lecherous woman whose magician power
    Is broken, and the balance of her mind
    Made one with the fool's bauble, and her wand,
    That was of steel and fire, like a reed, snapped!

<<1. S'afi is the Egyptian for fear.>>

                      S'AFI.

    So lived my father.  Tell me of his death.

                    AMENHATEP.

    At thy first breath the gods were patient still,
    Till the abomination filled its cup,
    And hatred took her heart.  She slew thy sire,
    And made his body the banquet of her sin
    In the infernal temple.  "So," she said,
    "I reap the incarnation of the god."
    So, gloomy and hideous, she would prowl about
    Seeking fresh human feasts, and bloody rites
    Stained the white altar of the world.  And yet
    Her power is gone, and we behold her go,
    Haggard and weary, through the palace courts
    And through the temple, lusting for strange loves
    And horrible things, and thirsting for new steam
    Of thickening blood upon her altar steps.
    Her body wearies of desire, and fails
    To satisfy the fury of her spirit;
    The blood-feasts sicken her and yield no strength;
    She is made one with hell, and violent force
    Slips and is weakness, and extreme desire
    Spends supple. {143B}

                      S'AFI.

                 I have heard you as a god
    Immutable.

                     CHORUS.

                 Thou art as proud and calm
    As statued Memnon.  Thou art more than god
    And less than man.  Thine eyelids tremble not.

                      S'AFI.

    I shall avenge it as a god.  The land
    Shall be made free.

                    AMENHATEP.

                      And the old gods have sway,
    Re-born from incorruption.

                      S'AFI.

                                  The old gods!
    I must muse deeply.  Keep your ancient ways
    A little.  I must play the part through so.

                     CHORUS.

    In the ways of the North and the South
      Whence the dark and the dayspring are drawn,
    We pass with the song of the mouth
      Of the notable Lord of the Dawn.
    Unto Ra, the desire of the East, let the clamour of singing proclaim
      The fire of his name!

    In the ways of the East and the West
      Whence the night and the day are discrowned,
    We pass with the beat of his breast,
      And the breath of his crying is bound.
    Unto Toum, the low Lord of the West, let the noise of our chant be the
        breath
      Proclaiming him Death! {144A}

    In the ways of the depth and the height,
      Where the multitude stars are at ease,
    There is music and terrible light,
      And the violent song of the seas.
    Unto Mou, the most powerful Lord of the South, let our worship declare
      Him Lord of the Air!

    In the mutable fields that are sown
      Of a seed that is whiter than noon,
    Whose harvest is beaten and blown
      By the magical rays of the moon,
    In the caverns and wharves of the wind, in the desolate seas of the air,
      Revolveth our prayer!

    In the sands and the desert of death,
      In the horrible flowerless lands,
    In the fields that the rain and the breath
      Of the sun make as gold as the sands
    With ripening wheat, in the earth, in the infinite realm of its seed,
      The hearts of us bleed!

    In the wonderful flowers of the foam,
      Blue billows and breakers grown grey,
    When the storm sweeps triumphantly home
      From the bed of the violate day,
    In the furious waves of the sea, wild world of tempestuous night,
      Our song is as light!

    In the tumult of manifold fire,
      Multitudinous mutable feet
    That dance to an infinite lyre
      On the heart of the world as they beat,
    In the flowers of the bride of the flame, in the warrior Lord of the
        Fire,
      There burns our desire!

                    AMENHATEP.

    Cry now, bewail the broken house, bewail
    The ruin of the land; cry out on Fate! {144B}

                     CHORUS.

    Slow wheels of unbegotten hate
    And changeless circles of desire,
    Formless creations uncreate,
    Swift fountains of ungathered fire,
    The misty counterpoise of time,
    Dim winds of ocean and sublime
    Pyramids of forgotten foam
    Whirling, vague cones of shapeless sleep
    And infinite dreams, and stars that roam,
    And comets moving through the deep
    Unfathomable skies,
    Darker for moonlight, and the glow-worm eyes
    Of dusky women that were stars,
    And paler curves of the immutable bars
    That line the universe with light,
    Great eagle-flights of mystic moons
    That dip, while the dull midnight swoons
    About the skirts of Night:
    These bowed and shaped themselves and said:
    "It shall be thus!"
    And the intolerable luminous
    Death that is god bent down his head
    And answered: "Thus immutably,
    Above all days and deeds, shall be!"
    And the great Light that is above all gods
    Lifted his calm brow, spake, and all the seas,
    And all the air, and all the periods
    Of seasons and of stars gave ear, and these
    Vaults of heaven heard
    The great white Light that shaped its secrecies
    Into one holy terrible word,
    Higher than all words spoken; for He said:
    "Death is made change, and only change is dead."
    For the most holy spirit of a man
    Burns through the limit of the wheels that ran
    Through all the unrelenting skies
    When Icarus died,
    And leaps, the flight of wise omnipotent eyes,
    When Daedalus espied
    An holy habitation for the shrine
    Solitary, 'mid the night of broken brine {145A}
    That foamed like starlight round the desolate shore.<<1>>
    So to the mine of that crystalline ore
    Golden, the electric spark of man is drawn
    Deep in the bosom of the world, to soar
    New-fledged, an eagle to the dazzling dawn
    With lidless eyes undazzled, to arise,
    Son of the morning, to the Southern skies;
    And fling its wild chant higher at the fall
    Of even, and of bright Hyperion;
    To mix its fire with dew, to call
    The spirit of the limitless air, made one
    In the amazing essence of all light.
    Limitless, emanation of the might
    Of the great Light above all gods, the fire
    Of our supreme desire,
    So out of grievous labyrinths of the mind
    The soul's desire may find
    Some passionate thread, the clear note of a bird,
    To make the dark ways of the gods as light,
    And bring forth music from slow chants unheard,
    And visions from the fathomless night.
    So is the spirit of the loftier man
    Made holy and most strong against his fate;
    So is the desolate visage of the wan
    Lord of Amenti<<2>> covered, and the gate
    Of Ra made perfect.  So the waters flow
    Over the earth, throughout the sea,
    Till all its deserts glow,
    And all its salt springs vanish, and night flee
    The pinions of the day wide-spread, and pure
    Fresh fountains of sweet water that endure
    Assume the crown of the wide world, and lend
    A star of many summits to his head
    That rules his fate and compasses his end.
    And seeks the holy mountain of the dead
    To draw dead fire, and breathe, and give it life!

<<1. See Vergil, "Aen." vi. II. 14-19.>>
<<2. The West: the Egyptian Land of the Dead.>>

    But thou, be strong for strife,
    And, as a god, cry out, and let there be
    The mark of many footsteps on the sea {145B}
    Of angels hastening to fulfil
    Thy supreme, single will!
    Alone, intense, unmoved, not made for change,
    Let thy one godhead rise
    To move like morning, and like day to range,
    A furnace for the skies,
    That all men cry: "The uncreated God!
    Formless, ineffable, just, whose period
    Is as his name, Eternity!"  So bear
    The sceptre of the air!
    So mayest thou avenge, all-seeing, blind,
    The wrath of this consuming fire, that licks
    The rafters and the portals of the house,
    The gateways of the kingdom, where behind
    Lurk ruinous fates and consequence; where fix
    Their fangs the scorpions; where hide their brows
    The shamed protectors of the Egyptian land.
    Go forth avenging; men shall understand
    And worship, seeing justice as a spouse
    Lean on thine iron hand.

    For Murder walks by night, and hides her face,
    But righteous Wrath in the light, and knows his place;
    For hate of a mother is ill, and the lightning flashes
    But foil a harlot's will, burn the earth to ashes,
    Cleanse the incestuous sty of a whore's desire,
    Scatter the dung to the sky, and burn her with fire!
    So the avenging master shall cleanse his fate of shame,
    Set his seal of disaster, a royal seal to his name.
                                          ["Exeunt."

                      S'AFI.

    I am not Horus, but I shall be King.

                 "Enter" THE LEPER.

                    THE LEPER.

    I am a leper, but I am the king. {146A}

                      S'AFI.

    Monstrous illegible horror, let thy mouth
    Frame from its charnel-house some pregnant word
    Intelligible.

                    THE LEPER.

                  I am the king; thy mother's limbs
    Clung fast to mine when I begot thy father.

                      S'AFI.

    He died in battle; thou art not the king.

                    THE LEPER.

    I did not fall in battle; but my queen
    Saw on my breast the livid mark of sin
    That was the leprosy of her own soul,
    And drove me forth to compass by disgrace
    With infamies ineffable.

                      S'AFI.

    I shall avenge.  The old gods come again.

                    THE LEPER.

    Nay!  I have lived through all these barren years,
    Discrowned, diseased, abominable, cast out,
    And meditating on the event of life,
    And that initiated Hope that we,
    Royal, inherit, of the final life,
    Nor newer incarnation, and possessed
    Of strange powers, who have moved about this court
    Loathed, and unrecognised, and shunned, have thought
    That the old bondage was as terrible
    As thine incestuous mother's iron hand,
    Rending the entrails of her growing realm
    To seek her bloody fate, whose violence
    Even now makes the abyss of wrath divine
    Boil in the deep.  Thou mayest be that great
    Osiris, bidding man's high soul be free,
    Justified in its own higher self, made pure
    And perfect in its own eyes, being a god. {146B}
    Destroy this priestcraft!  We are priests indeed,
    Highest among the secret ones; and we --
    See where our heritage is made; I, king,
    A leper, and thyself, the hideous fruit
    Of what strange poisons?  But in mine own self
    I am the king and chief of all the priests;
    And thou, in thine own eyes, art a young god,
    Strong, beautiful, and lithe, a leaping fawn
    Upon the mountains.

                      S'AFI.

                          Yea, I am a god.
    I am fire against the fountain of my birth,
    The storm upon the earth that nurtured me!<<1>>
    Leave me: we twain have no more words to speak.

<<1. Fire and Water, Air and Earth, are the "antagonisms" of the"elements.">>

                    THE LEPER.

    Neither in heaven nor in hell.  I go,
    The dead king, worshipping the living man.
                                          ["Exit."

                      S'AFI.

    I have been a god so long, my thoughts run halt
    From many contemplations.  Like the flow
    Of a slow river deep and beautiful,
    My even life moved onward to full scope,
    The ocean of profounder deity,
    And -- suddenly -- the cataract!  My soul,
    Centered eternally upon itself,
    Comprehends hardly all this violence
    Of wayward men intemperate.  I am calm,
    And contemplate, without a muscle moved
    Or nerve set shrieking, all these ruinous deeds
    And dissolution of the royal house.
    I see this grey unnatural mother of mine
    Now, as she is, disrobed of deity,
    And like some reeling procuress grown wolf
    By infamous bewitchment, haunt the stairs, {147A}
    And pluck the young men by the robe, and take
    The maidens for her sacrifice, and burn
    With great unquenchable dead lustrous eyes
    Toward impossible things grown possible
    In Egypt.  I will cleanse the land of this.
    Let me remember I am yet a god!

               "Re-enter" THE LEPER.

                    THE LEPER.

    Thou must be brought before her presently
    Borne in a coffin.  See thou fill it not,
    But take the lion's mask and play his part
    Before the throne.  Be ready, and be strong.

                      S'AFI.

    I shall do so.  Come, let us go together
    In hateful love and sacrilegious hate,
    Disease and godhead.  I am still the god.
                                   ["Exeunt."

                  "Enter" RATOUM.

                     RATOUM.

    I stood upon the desert, and my eyes
    Beheld the splendid and supernal dawn
    Flame underneath the single star that burns
    Within the gateway of the golden East
    To rule my fate; but I have conquered Fate
    Thus far, that I am perfect in myself,
    The absolute unity and triple power
    Engrafted.  For the foolish people see
    An old grey woman, wicked, not divine,
    Who<<1>> shall this hour assume the royal self
    And the old godhead, and the lithe strong limbs
    And supple loins and splendid bosom bare
    Full of bright milk, the breast of all the world.
    This lesser mastery I have made mine-own
    By strange devices, by unheard-of-ways
    Of wisdom, by strong sins, and magical
    Rituals made righteous of their own excess
    Of horror; but I have not made myself {147B}
    So absolute as I shall do to-day
    In this new infamy.  For I must pass
    Desolate into the dusk of things again,
    Having risen so far to fall to the abyss,
    Deeper for exaltation; I must go
    Wailing and naked into the inane
    Cavernous shrineless place of misery,
    Forgetful, hateful, impotent, except
    The last initiation seize my soul,
    And fling me into Isis' very self,
    The immortal, mortal.  Let me know this night
    Whether my place is found among the stars
    That wander in the deep, or made secure
    As the high throne of her that dwells in heaven,
    Fruitful for life and death, Wisdom her name!
    This hour the foolish ones shall see their souls
    Shrink at my manifest deity.  This night
    My spirit on my spirit shall beget
    Myself for my own child.  Behold! they come,
    Fantastically moving through the dance,
    The many mourners, and the fatal bier
    Looms in the dimness of the anteroom.
    It is enough.  My hour is at hand!

<<1. This antithetical use of the relative is uncommon.>>

         CHORUS "enter and circumambulate".

    Even as the traitor's breath
    Goeth forth, he perisheth
    By the secret sibilant word that is spoken unto death.

    Even as the profane hand
    Reacheth to the sacred sand,
    Fire consumes him that his name be forgotten in the land.

    even as the wicked eye
    Seeks he mysteries to spy,
    So the blindness of the gods takes his spirit: he shall die.

    Even as the evil priest,
    Poisoned by the sacred feast,
    Changes by its seven powers to the misbegotten beast: {148A}

    Even as the powers of ill,
    Broken by the wanded will,
    Shriek about the holy place, vain and vague and terrible:

    Even as the lords of hell,
    Chained in fires before the spell,
    Strain upon the sightless steel, break not fetters nor compel:

    So be distant, O profane!
    Children of the hurricane!
    Lest the sword of fire destroy, lest the ways of death be pain!

    So depart, and so be wise,
    Lest your perishable eyes
    Look upon the formless fire, see the maiden sacrifice!

    So depart, and secret flame
    Burn upon the stone of shame,
    That the holy ones may hear music of the sleepless Name!

    Now the sacred and obscene
    Kiss, the pure and the unclean
    Mingle in the incense steaming up before the goddess queen.

    Holy, holy, holy spouse
    Of the sun-engirdled house,
    With the secret symbol burning on thy multiscient brows!

    Hear, O hear the mystic song
    Of the serpent-moving throng,
    Isis mother, Isis maiden, Isis beautiful and strong!

    Even as the traitor's breath
    Goeth forth, he perisheth
    By the secret sibilant word that is spoken unto death.

                     RATOUM.

    The hour is given unto death.  Bring in
    Dead Horus, for the night is shed above.
                               ["Coffin brought in."  {148B}

                     CHORUS.

    The noise of the wind of the winter; the sound
    Of the wings of the charioted night;
    The song of the sons of the seas profound;
    The thunder of death; the might
    Of the eloquent silence of black light!

                     RATOUM.

    The noise of many planets fallen far!

                     CHORUS.

    Death listens for the voice of life; night waits
    The dawn of wisdom: winter seeks the spring!

                     RATOUM.

    The music of all stars arisen; the breath
    Of God upon the valley of the dead!

                     CHORUS.

    The silence of the awaiting soul asleep!

                     RATOUM.

    The murmur of the fountain of my life!

                     CHORUS.

    The whole dead universe awaits the Word.

                     RATOUM.

    Now is the hour of life; my voice leaps up
    In the dim halls of death, and kindling flame
    Roars like the tempest through forgetfulness.
    This is my son, whose father is my son,
    From my own womb complete and absolute,
    And in this strong perfection of myself
    Stands the triumphant power of my desire,
    Manifest over self, and man, and god!
    For in the sacred coffin lies his corpse
    Who shall arise at the enormous word
    Of my creating deity; his life
    Shall quicken in him, and the dead man rise, {149A}
    Osiris; and all power be manifest
    In our supreme reunion; let the priest
    Cast incense on the fire, upon the ground
    Let water of the fertilising Nile
    Be spilt, because these dark maternal breasts
    That gave their milk to that divinest child
    Are not yet full of the transcending stream
    That knows its fountain in my deity.
    The incense fumes before me: I am come,
    Isis, within this body that ye know,
    Transmuting!  Look upon me, ye blind eyes!
    Behold, dull souls and ignorant desires!
    See if I be not altogether god!
          ["She assumes the appearance of her mature beauty, standing before
            them with the wand upraised."
    Wonder and worship!  Sing to me the song
    Of the extreme spring!  Rejoice in my great strength
    And infinite youth and new fertility,
    And lave your foreheads in this holy milk
    That springs, the fountain of humanity,
    Luminous in the temple!  Raise the hymn.

                     CHORUS.

      Through fields of foam ungarnered sweeps
        The fury of the wind of dawn;
      Through fiery desolation creeps
        The water of the wind withdrawn.
      With fire and water consecrate
      The foam and fire are recreate.
        With air uniting fire and water,
        The springtide's unbegotten daughter
      Blossoms in oceans of blue air,
      Flowers of new spring to bear.

      The sorrowful twin fishes glide
        Silent and sacred into sleep;
      The joyful Ram exalts his pride,
        Seeing the forehead of the deep
      Glow from his palace, as the sun
      Leaps to the spring, whose coursers run
        Flaming before their golden master,
        As death and winter and disaster
      Fall from the Archer's bitter kiss
      Fast to their mute abyss. {149B}

      The pale sweet blooms of lotus burn;
        The scent of spring is in the soul;
      Men's spirits to the loftiest turn;
        Light is extended and made whole.
      The waters of the whispering Nile
      Lisp of their loves a little while,
        Then break, like songsters, into sighing,
        Because the lazy days are dying;
      And swift and tawny streams must rise
      World's world to fertilise.

      The lotus is afire for love,
        Its yearnings are immortal still;
      But in its bosom, fed thereof,
        Lust, like a child, will have his will.
      Immortal fervour, strangely blent
      With mystic sensual sacrament,
        Fills up its cup; its petals tremble
        With faint desires that dissemble
      The fierce intention to be wed
      One with the spring sun's head.

      The fountains of the river yearn
        Toward the sacred temple-walls,
      They foam upon the sands that burn
        With spring's delirious festivals.
      They flash upon the gleaming ways,
      They cry, they chant aloud the praise
        Of Isis, and our temple kisses
        Their flowery water-wildernesses,
      Whose foamheads nestle to the stones
      With slumberous antiphones.

      All birds and beasts and fish are fain
        To mingle passion with the hope
      All creatures hold, that cycled pain
        May make its stream the wider scope
      Of many lives and changing law,
      Till to the sacred fountains draw
        Essences of dim being, mated
        With lofty substance uncreated,
      Concluding the full period
      That makes all being God.

     S'AFI "(disguised in the mask of a lion)".

    I lift the censer.  Hail, immortal queen,
    From the vast hall of death!  Dead Horus cries {150A}
    Towards the dawn.  Bid me awake, O mother!
    O mother! from the darkness of the tomb,
    That live Osiris may cry back to thee,
    O spouse! O sister! from the halls of life,
    The profound lake, the immeasurable depth,
    The sea of the three Loves!  O mother, mother!
    Isis, the voice that even Amenti hears,
    Speak, that I rise from chaos, from the world
    Of shapeless and illusionary forms,
    Of dead men's husks, and unsubstantial things.
    O mother, mother, mother!  I arise!

                     RATOUM.

    Horus, dread godhead, child of me, arise!
    Arise Osiris, to the sacred rites
    And marriage-bed of fuller deity.
    Now, at the serpent-motion of this wand,
    Rise from the dead!  Arise, dead Horus, rise
    To be Osiris.  Isis speaks!  Arise!
          ["The coffin is opened."  THE LEAPER "is raised out of it swathed in
            bandages."
    Our of the sleep of ages wake and live!
                        ["The wrappings fall off."

                    THE LEPER.

    I am the resurrection and the death!
          [RATOUM "falls back shrieking.  The priests raise a chant to stifle
            the sound."

          S'AFI "(tearing off his mask)".

    I am the hideous poison of thy veins
    And foulest fruit of thy incestuous womb.

                     RATOUM.

    I am thy mother!  I have nurtured thee
    With woman's tenderness and godhead's strength.

                      S'AFI.

    I am the avenger of my own false birth. {150B}

                     RATOUM.

    I have loved thee ever; I have made thee god.

                      S'AFI.

    I hate myself, and therefore I hate thee.

                     RATOUM.

    I am still goddess, still desire thy love.
    That leper lies: thou art indeed a god.

                      S'AFI.

    I am a god to execute my will.
                  ["Threatens her with his dagger."

                     RATOUM.

    Mercy!  Thou canst not strike a woman down!

                      S'AFI.

    So!  The thin casing of the godhead rots,
    Mere mummy-cloth: the rotten corpse within,
    Dust and corruption!  I am still the god,
    And gods slay women: therefore I slay thee.

                     RATOUM.

    Then thou shalt seem me once again a god!
         ["By a tremendous effort she towers before him.  Silently they gaze
           at one another for a while, he vainly endeavouring to force himself
           to strike.  At last she collapses into the throne; he springs
           forward and drives his knife into her."

                    THE LEPER.

    It is finished!  The sacrament is made!  The god
    Has flamed within the altar-cake: 'tis done!
            ["Silence: presently" THE LEPER "breaks into a horrible, silent,
               smooth laughter.  Again silence." {151A}

                      S'AFI.

    I am done with godhead: let me be a man.

                     CHORUS.

    Hail, S'afi, king of Egypt and the Nile!
    Hail, S'afi, Lord of the two lands,<<1>> all hail!

<<1. Upper and Lower Egypt.>>

                      S'AFI.

    King of himself and lord of life and death,
    No lesser throne!  I have borne me as a god,
    Avenging on my nearest blood the sin
    That brought me shameful to the shameless light.
    I have not faltered nor turned back at all,
    Nor moved my purpose for a moment's thought.
    Nor will I now.  The god is gone from me,
    And as a man I feel the living shame
    of my existence, and the biting brand
    Of murder set upon me, and the sting
    Of my discrowned forehead.  I shall die
    Having this proof of my own nobleness
    To soothe the rancour of my stricken soul
    In the abodes of night, that I have dared,
    With the first knowledge to make good my spirit
    Against its fate, to steel my flinching heart
    Against all men, dominions, shapes, and powers,
    Seen and unseen, to justice and to truth,
    Sought out by desolate ways of hateful deeds,
    And so set free myself from my own fate,
    Whom I will smite to end the coil of things
    Here, to begin -- what life?  For Life I know
    Stands like a living sentinel behind
    The rugged barrier of death, the gates
    Where the rude valley narrows, and man hears
    The steep and terrible cataract of time
    Break, and lose shape and substance in the foam
    And spray of an eternity of air!
    My death, and not my life, may crown me king! {151B}
    So let me not be buried in that state
    Due to the hateful rank that I abjure
    By this proud act, but let my monument
    Say to succeeding peoples and dim tribes
    Unthought of: "This was born a living man
    Bound, and he cut the chain of circumstance,
    And spat on Fate."  And all the priests shall say
    And all the people: "Verily and Amen."
                                ["Stabs himself."

                     CHORUS.

      Spirit of the Gods!  O single,
      Sacred, secret, let the length
      East and west, the depth and height,
      North and south, with music tingle,
      Ring with battled clarion choirs of the far-resounding light!
      Let the might of
      Osirian sacrifice
      Dwell upon the self-slain king!
      Spirit of the Gods!  Unite
      Streams of sacramental light
      In the soul, thrice purified,
      Consecrated thrice,
      Till Osiris justified
      In the supreme sacrifice
      Take his kingdom.  Hear the cry
      That the wailing vultures make,
      Circling in the blackening sky
      Over the abysmal lake.
      Spirit, for our spirit's sake
      Give the token of thy fire
      Trident in the lambent air,
      Till our spirits unaware
      Worship and aspire!
      Hear, beyond all periods,
      Timeless, formless, multiform,
      Thou, supreme above the storm,
      Spirit of the Holy Ones, Spirit of the Gods!

                 "Enter" MESSENGER.

                    MESSENGER.

    The battle rages: even now the shock
    Of hostile spears makes the loud earth resound,
    The wide sky tremble. {152A}

                    AMENHATEP.

                         Here lies Horus dead,
    There Isis slain.  We have no leader left.

                    MESSENGER.

    The fight is doubtful.  We may conquer still.

                    AMENHATEP.

    By this shed blood and desecrated shrine
    And horrible hour of madness, may it be
    That all the evil fortune of the land,
    Created of these dead iniquities,
    Burn its foul flame out.  Are ye not appeased,
    Even ye, O powers of Evil, at this shame
    And sacrilege?  And ye, Great Powers of Good,
    Hath not enough of misery been wrought,
    Enough of expiation?  We have sinned,
    But our iniquity he purged away,
    Who as avenger hath denied his life,
    To be made one with ye.  O by his blood
    And strong desire of holiness, and might
    And justice, let him mediate between
    And mitigate your anger, that the name
    Of Egypt may not perish utterly.
    Make, make and end!

                    THE LEPER.

                   All things must work themselves
    To their own end.  Created sin grown strong
    Must claim its guerdon.  Ye abase yourselves
    Well for repentance; but ye shall not ward
    With tears and prayers the ruin ye have made,
    Nor banish the enormous deities
    Of judgment so invoked by any prayers,
    Or perfumes or libations.  What must be
    Will be.  Material succour ye demand
    In vain.  But ye may purify yourselves.

                    AMENHATEP.

    Knows then thy prophecy of our final doom? {152B}

                    THE LEPER.

    Inquire not of your fate!  Myself do know,
    Mayhap.  Ye shall know.  I await the event.

                    AMENHATEP.

    We shall be patient, and we shall be strong.

                    THE LEPER.

    The noise of rushing feet!  The corridor
    Rings with their scurrying fear.  This is the end.
          ["Enter a flying soldier, crying aloud, and seeks a hiding-place."
    Speak not, thou trembling slave: we understand!
          ["The soldier slips on the marble floor, and lies groaning."

                    AMENHATEP.

    See that due silence greets catastrophe!
    No word from now without command of mine.
         ["Silence.  Then grows a noise of men fighting, &c.; above this after
            a while rises a shrill laughter, terrifying to hear.  Then cries
            of victory and the triumphant laugh of a great conqueror.  His
            heavy step, and that of his staff, &c., is next heard coming
            masterfully down the corridor.  The soldier gives a shriek."

                    THE LEPER.

    The Syrian must not see a cur like this
    Cower at death.  For Egypt's honour, then! {153A}
    Give me that spear.  ["Aside."]  That royalty's own hand
    Should send this thing to his long misery!
            ["Taking a spear, he runs through the soldier."

       "The" KING OF SYRIA, "attended, enters."

                  KING OF SYRIA.

    Your armies beaten back before my face,
    Your weapons broken, I am come to take
    The crown from her pale brows that sitteth there.

                    THE LEPER.

    The Queen is dead: I am the King of Egypt.
    To-day I saved the house from its own shame
    By strange ways: I will strike one blow to save
    The land from its invaders.  In the name
    Of all our gods, I here invoke on thee
    The spirit of my leprosy.  Have at you!
        ["Springs at the" KING OF SYRIA, "only to be transfixed on his drawn
        sword; but he succeeds in clasping the king, who staggers.  His
        soldiers, with a shout, rush forward, drag down" THE LEPER "and attack
        the priests.  All are slain.  Silence: then a shield drops, clanging
        on the ground."

    KING OF SYRIA "(assuming crown and sitting on throne)".

    Salute the conqueror of the Egyptian land!
                  ["The soldiers salute and cheer."
    I am a leper: get ye hence!
                              ["Exeunt soldiers."
                            Unclean!  ["Silence."
    This was the hour that my ambitious hopes
    Centered upon; and now I grasp the hour --
    So fares mortality.                 ["Silence."
                        Unclean! unclean! {153B}

{full page below}

                                CURTAIN. {153}








                          THE MOTHERS'S TRAGEDY.<<1>>

                          1899.  {col. start below}

<<1. The justification of this play, both in subject and construction, is to be found in the Introduction to the "Ion" of Euripides.  [Verral, Camb. Univ. Press, 1890.]  The chief of its many morals is that sin must reap its harvest in spite of repentance, prayer, and the other dodges by which men seek to elude Fate.>>

    SCENE. -- "The room is furnished with comfort as well as luxury.  A
        crucifix is in the window to the East, and the room is flooded with a
        ray of sunlight."

    CORA VAVASOUR "(late of the Halls)".
    ULRIC, "illegitimate son of" CORA, "ignorant of his parentage."
    MADELINE, "girl in love with" ULRIC.
    THE SPIRIT OF TRAGEDY, "as Chorus, sits in the back, crouched, brooding
        over the scene.  It is veiled and throned."


                SPIRIT OF TRAGEDY.

    HERE, in the home of a friend,
    Here, in the mists of a lie,
    The pageant moves on to the desolate end
    Under a sultry sky.
    Noon is upon us, and Night,
    Spreading her wings unto flight,
    Visits the lands that lie far in the West,
    Where the bright East is at peace on her breast:
    Opposite quarters unite.
    Soon is the nightfall of Destiny here;
    Nature's must pass as her hour is gone by.
    Only another than she is too near,
    Gloom in the sky.
    One who can never pass over shall sever
    Links that were forged of Love's hand;
    Love that was strong die away as a song,
    Melt as a cable of sand.
    But I am watching, with unwearied eye,
    The wayfare of the tragedy. {154B}
    I see the brightness of the home; I see
    The grisly phantom of despair to be.
    I see the miserable past redeemed,
    (Intolerable as its purpose seemed,)
    Redeemed by love: I see the jealous days
    Pass into sunshine, and youth-beamng rays,
    Quicken the soul's elixir.  Let me show
    How these air-castles tumble into woe.
          ["Raises sceptre as if to start action of play."

                      CORA.

    Why did your eyelids quiver as I spoke?
    A smile, a tear? that trembling, in their deep
    Violet passion, of the beautiful
    Eyes that they half discover?  Speak to me.
    I have long thought a secret was your spouse,
    Shared your deep fancies and your lightest word,
    Partook your maiden bed, and gave you dreams
    Somewhat too troublous to be virginal.

                    MADELINE.

    My dear kind Cora, do they lie to you,
    These fancies of my idle hours?  Believe,
    I seem to tremble at my inward thought;
    My heart is full of wonder.  When I go
    Nightward beneath the moon, and take my thoughts
    Past here pale beauty through some glowing skies {154B}
    Not unfamiliar, through exulting gates --
    "Lift up your heads," I hear the angels cry;
    "Be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors.
    A child-heart seeks the Lover of the Child!"
    O meek and holy Jesus, hath Thy heart
    Yearned unto me, Thy maiden?  For I knew
    A bliss so pregnant with the unforeseen
    As brought me to the very feet of Christ,
    Weeping.  How clouded that mysterious
    Passion!  I fell a-weeping in my bed,
    Forgetting, or not knowing.  For a fire
    Too perfect for my sinful soul to touch
    Gathered me closely in itself, to hide
    It utter glory from me.  Now I feel
    Swift troubled tremblings in myself: I seek
    Again those visionary skies.  Alas!
    That angel chorus swells another note
    I cannot understand.

                      CORA.

                        I am so moved,
    I cannot find it in my heart to say
    The words I purposed.  Let my folly pass
    As an old worldly woman's talk.

                    MADELINE.

                                 O no!
    Your bear the sainted fragrance of your love
    Higher than even my dreams.  In earthly life
    Your are not earthly.  I have often thought
    The Virgin has some special care for you,
    And given of her beauty and her peace
    A special dower.  Your thoughts are ever pure;
    Your soul in sweet communion with God!
    Why, you are crying?

                      CORA.

                        You say this to me?
    O could you look within a magic glass,
    Holding my hand, such sights would come to you
    Beyond your knowledge -- ay, beyond belief!
    I am no saintly virgin wrapped in prayer, {155A}
    Nor is my life one river of clear water
    Drawn from the wells of God.  You foolish child!
    My love for you you cannot understand,
    Nor the low motive -- you have shown it me --
    Of this beginning of our talk.

                    MADELINE.

                                    Say on!

                CORA ("meaningly)".

    Much less you understand the love I bear
    To Ulric!

          MADELINE "gives a little cry."

              Heart of Christ! it cannot be!

                      CORA.

    No, child; I tricked you.  Is your secret out?

                    MADELINE.

    I am dismayed at my discovery.
    ("Slowly.")  I never guessed my own poor silliness
    Until that moment when you frightened me.

                      CORA.

    And now you know how dear he is to you!
    Come, child, I love you both.  Your happiness
    Is my life's purpose.  I have seen the truth
    Of this in you; it comes to every one.
    I know that he is half in love with you.
    Look once again as you did look just now,
    And he would die for you.  O foolish girl!
          [MADELINE "weeps quietly for a little," CORA "caressing her."

                    MADELINE.

    Please let me go: you are too kind to me! {155B}

                      CORA.

    Rest, sunny head!  A little while to sleep,
    And then -- perhaps the Mother in a dream
    May comfort you.  A woman's love is this
    To have one heart, an undivided love;
    But Hers -- division in the universe
    Makes multiple each part.  Sweet Madeline,
    Believe me, She will come to maiden dreams,
    Bestow Her peace, and so direct the life
    That is not unto God unconsecrate
    For being dedicated unto love!
                              ["Exit" MADELINE.

              CORA "remains thinking".

    I was no bolder twenty years ago!
    Time, Time, thou maker and destroyer both,
    Only in resurrection hast no part!
                                        ["Broods."

    SPIRIT OF TRAGEDY "(with light enjoyment)".

    How light and how agreeable,
    Paved pathway to the gate of hell!
    See how all virtues, graces, shine,
    Till woman half appears divine!
    But I am waiting, watching still
    The treason of the powers of ill.
    Soft, moveless, as a tigress glides,
    Strange laughing devilry abides
    Its hour to poison.  How they gloat,
    The fiends, upon her lips and throat!
    They touch her heart, they speer<<1>> her eyes,
    They linger on the lovely prize!
    O dead she thought them!  It is written:
    "Eve's heel is by the serpent bitten,
    His head she bruises."  No indeed!
    Not woman, but the woman's seed!
    Hark! in the cloak of "Love of Truth"
    They whisper "Memory of Youth";
    And, mindful of the deadliest sin,
    Hint: "Sinful woman, look within!" {156A}

<<1. To search, with the idea of looking more deeply.  The grotesque word is used to suggest the quaint inspection of the malicious goblins.>>


                      CORA.

    Ah me! if she could look within a glass<<1>>
    With spells and pantacles<<2>> well fortified!
    I have a glass whose bitter destiny
    No wizard may conjure.  Arise ye there,
    Old hours of horror, clear by one and one,
    In the confused and tossing ocean,
    Where memory picks spar and spar from out
    The dreadful whirlpool hardly yet appeased,
    To join together in imagination
    The ship -- the wreck!  And yet I stand at last
    Secure in my unselfish love to them,
    Repaid in mine own currency.  I trust
    God that made smooth the road beneath the hearse
    Of my forgetful age.  All must be well.

<<1. The crystal sphere is habitually used by clairvoyants and others for the purposes of divination.  Such a globe should be ceremonially consecrated and vitalised.>>
<<2. From  GR:pi-alpha-nu, all, a diminutive.  The word thus means "a universe in little."  It is usually a square or circle of vellum or other material, designed and painted appropriately to its purpose; a spirit is then evoked and commanded to dwell therein, that it may do the required office.>>

       SPIRIT OF TRAGEDY "(with sombre joy)".

    Mortals never learn from stories
    How catastrophe becomes;
    How above the victor's glories
    In the trumpets and the drums,
    And the cry of millions "Master!"
    Looms the shadow of disaster.
    Every hour a man hath said
    "That at least is scotched and dead."
    Some one circumstance: "At last
    That, and its effects, are past."
    Some one terror -- subtle foe! --
    "I have laid that spectre low!"
    They know not, learn not, cannot calculate
    How subtly Fate {156B}
    Weaves its fine mesh, perceiving how to wait;
    Or how accumulate
    The trifles that shall make it master yet
    Of the strong soul that bade itself forget.

                      CORA.

    Let me not shrink!  Truth always purifies.
    I will go through those two impossible
    Actual years.  The city was itself;
    Hard thinking if hard drinking -- sober-sides!
    One night I stepped up tremulous on the stage,
    Sang something, found my senses afterward
    Only to that intolerable sound
    Of terrible applause.  They shook the sky
    With calling me to answer.  And I lay --
    A storm of weeping swept across my frame --
    Till the polite, the hateful manager
    Led me to face a nation's lunatic
    Roar of delight.  I soon got over that,
    And over -- yes, the other thing.  Three months --
    They used to quote me on the Stock Exchange!
    I will say this to me, I will not shrink:
    Look up you coward, Cora Vavasour!
    Which fathered me the bastard?  Every rag,<<1>>
    Prurient licksores of society,
    Gave it a different father.  Am I sure
    Myself?  The shameful Mammon was his name,
    Glittering gold!  I loved my opulence,
    Cursed my "misfortune."  Childbirth sobered me.
    I loved the child, the only human love
    I ever tasted, and I sacrificed
    The popularity, the infamy,
    Of my old life; I sought another world.
    I "got religion" -- how I hate the phrase! --
    So jest the matron newspapers.  The end. {157A}
    Since then I live, as I am living still,
    Wrapped in the all-absorbing love of him
    My child, my child!  And now my selfishness
    Is shamed, and I have made the sacrifice
    To give this pure heart to that maidenly,
    And let mine old age grow upon my hair,
    Finding my happiness in seeing him
    The all-devoted, and in God's good pleasure
    Have little children playing at my knees,
    That I may listen, in their innocent prayers,
    For Jesus' voice.  And I will never break
    The secret of his being to my boy
    Lest he despise me.  This one reticence
    I think my long-drawn agony may earn.
    For I will do without a mother's name
    If only I may keep a son's love still!
                                            ["Exit."

<<1. Society papers.>>

       SPIRIT OF TRAGEDY "(with sarcastic verve)".

    She will not break an oath so wisely sworn,
    Unlock her secret to disdain.
    Wisdom is hers -- what angel need to warn?
    Since angles only seek to gain
    That wisdom of the unprofane.
    All future happiness I surely see.
    I am the Soul of Tragedy!

      "Enter" ULRIC "(musing, with love-light in his eyes)."

        {"At his entrance," SPIRIT OF TRAGEDY "changes to a shape of incarnate
          Horror, and continues:"

    Naked as dawn, the purpose of the hour
    Grows on my vision, and my cynic laughter
    Chills in my veins: the old avenging power
    Shows me the thing that is to be hereafter.
    I gloated on the coming of the curse --
    I did create an hearse,
    Black plumes and solemn mourners; and I saw
    The triumph of some natural law
    Fit for a poet's verse.
    I saw some common fate to lure, to tempt;
    (No mortal of the ages is exempt) {157B}
    Some notable disaster to the house
    Wherein such piety and love abide;
    I saw some hateful spouse
    Carry away the bride.
    That feeble prescience of events to come,
    That stultified imagining, hath lied;
    And I can see, though all the signs be dumb
    And auguries unfruitful -- I can see,
    Now, some intolerable tragedy
    Fit for a god to picture, not a man!
    I see the breaking of the rosary,
    And Fate's cold fingers snap the span
    Of three most innocent and pleasant lives.
    So terrible a happening dives
    Swift from God's hand to the abyss of hell,
    And in its torment thrives,
    Gathering curses from the darkest cave,
    Calling corruption from the grave
    to form one shape of aspect multiple
    Divided in its single spell;
    One spectre smooth and suave,
    More horrible than any fear or active doom,
    Beckoning with its lewd malignant finger,
    Beckoning, beckoning, to no pious tomb
    Where pitiable memory might linger.
    A creeping, living horror hems me in,
    A masterpiece of sin!
    Even my soul, inured to contemplate
    The dreadful, the perverse design of Fate,
    In many stories never meant to win
    Applause of mortals or of gods, but made
    To choke man's spirit in its shade,
    And make him, in his pride and happiness,
    In virtue's mantle and love's seemly dress,
    Immeasurably afraid.
    The hour is on them -- let its weight express
    All blood, all life, from the disastrous grape!
    In God, in mercy, there is no escape,
    No anchor for distress.
    The hour strikes mournfully upon the bell
    Of the most awful precipice
    That merges hell in hell.
    There is deep silence in that dread abyss;
    There is deep silence in the sphered sun;
    There is deep silence where the planets run, {158A}
    Majestic fires!  Before the throne of God
    Deep silence waits the lifting of the rod,
    The moving nod.
    Silence, reflected thence, still and intense, into the firmament;
    Such silence as befits the event.

                  "Re-enter" CORA.

                      CORA.

    This is the hour, O child whom I have loved
    With love more tender than a mother's love,
    Bring thy friend; this moment have I sought,
    Awaiting always the propitious time,
    To speak some purpose grown more definite
    Than is our wont.  We spend the honey days
    In gentle intercourse: high souls have stood
    Watching us drink from their crystalline stream
    Meandering through language: mighty kings
    Have listened as we read of their dead pomp;
    Fair women blushed as their imagined shapes
    Flitted before us in the tender page.
    We too have followed every curve and line
    In fairy fancies on our canvas drawn
    Of stately people, and the changing rhyme
    Of virgins dancing before Artemis;
    In all the pleasures that delight the mind,
    Invigorate the soul, lend favour to
    The body of the youth -- for I am old --

                      ULRIC.

    My Cora! old!  But urgently a word
    Came of some purpose.  I am half afraid
    To hear it -- and yourself!  Reluctance sits
    Dogged against the will to speak.  Dear friend,
    Let us sit close and whisper.

                      CORA.

                               Listen, then!
    Your are grown man: young men seek happiness.
    Is there one joy your soul hath never felt?
    One pure sweet passion? {158B}

                ULRIC "(surprised)".

                 Sweet! you speak of love!
    You must have guessed I meant to question you,
    And smoothed the passage to my modesty.

     CORA "(with bitter sorrow at her heart)".

    You make me very glad.  Yes, yes, indeed,
    Love is my meaning.  Does it shame me much
    To talk so openly of love to you?
    But I am old enough to be -- to be --

           ULRIC "(breaking right out)".

    My wife!  O Cora, I have loved you so!
    My heart is like a fountain of the sea.
    I burn, I tremble; in my veins there swims
    A torrid ecstasy of madness.  Ah!
    Ah God! I kiss you, kiss you!  O you faint!
    Sweetheart, my passion overwhelms your soul.
    Your virginal sweet spirit cannot reach
    My fury.  You are silent.  Yet you love!
    I read it in the terror of your eyes,
    The crimson of your burning face.  I know,
    I know you love me!  Cora, Cora, tell me!
    O she will die!  I would not -- I was rough --
    My overmastering desire to you --
    My queen, my wife, this maddens me.

                CORA "(recovering)".

                                     You fool!
    You beast!  I hate you for your stupid self!
    I am defiled!  Go!  touch me not!  Speak not!
    I am accursed of the Lord my God.
                                        ["Shrieks." {159A}

    ULRIC "(still passionate, yet full of tender concern)".

    Darling! my darling!  How have I done this?

                      CORA.

    Fool!  It is madness!  Yes, and punishment.
    O God, that all my love should come to this!
    You, you are mad!  I speak of love, and you,
    You -- you are acting!  I was taken in!
    Let's laugh about it!
                      ["Tries to laugh, sinks back."
                           It was not well done.
            [ULRIC "is silent, and, puzzled, waits for her to go on."
    Surely you know that it was Madeline!

                      ULRIC.

    What!  I should wed that pretty Puritan?
    The downcast eyes and delicate white throat,
    The lily, when I saw the rose before me?
    Your full delicious beauty was as God!
    You are a bunch of admirable grapes
    Fit to intoxicate my being!  Yes!
    I would not give that sunny fruit of yours
    For twenty such frail flowers as Madeline.
    I am a man -- you mate me with a girl!

                      CORA.

    Stop! not a word!  My blasphemy to hear,
    Yours to speak out -- when you are told the truth!

                      ULRIC.

    What truth?  This word hath first an ugly sound.
    The truth!  God curse it to His blackest hell
    If but it stand between us and our love! {159B}

                      CORA.

    O Ulric, Ulric! bear with me awhile!
    Speak no more words -- each syllable strikes here,
                               ["Hand to heart."
    A cloud of winged scorpions, that rage
    In mine own deepest self; for there I know
    Tame harpies that had ceased to torture me;
    And this more ghastly brood renews their sting,
    Adding a triple poison!  O my soul
    Is torn with pangs more horrible than hell,
    Scorching the very marrow of my bones,
    Corrupting me -- corrupting me, I say, --
    O God! is any safety at Thy feet?
    Be silent, O be silent for awhile,
    And I will shrivel up thy wretched ears,
    Give thee to curse the hour that saw thee first,
    To curse thy parents and thine own young head.
    May God forbid that thou should rail on Him!
    Leave me a little to my torment yet,
    That I may quell the host of devil forms
    That eat my soul up, many torturing,
    And one -- ah! one accursed beyond all --
    Soothing!  O heart of Jesus, bleed with mine!
                                   ["Kneels towards East."
    See, see!  I seek Thee on maternal knees!
    Conceive Her pangs that bore Thee, when her shame
    Devoured Her, with no memory of love --
    As mine, as mine!  O bitter memories!
                                     ["A pause."

                      ULRIC.

    Tell me, dear friend! anxiety and love
    Are like to kill me.  Tell me in three words.

         CORA "(slowly and deliberately)".

    I am a dancer and a prostitute! {160A}

           ULRIC "smiles contemptuously".

    Why trick me with so pitiful a lie?
    Where you the vilest woman on the earth,
    Mere scum of filth shed off the city's dregs --
    Were you the meanest and most treacherous --
    Were you the sordid soul that most contrasts
    With your true, noble, and unselfish self --
    Were you the synthesis of all I hate,
    In mind and body leprous and deformed --
    Did every word and gesture fill my soul
    With hatred and its parody, disgust --
    It touches not my question!  This one fact
    O'ermasters all eccentric circumstance:
    I love you -- you, and not your attributes!

                      CORA.

    Great noble soul!  I hate myself the more
    That I must wound you further with the truth.
    A double prong this poisoned poinard
    Snaps in our hearts.  I kept the secret long.
    Your breath, that burns upon me, wraps me round
    With whirling passion, pierces through my veins
    With its unhallowed fire, constrains, compels,
    Drags out the corpse of twenty years ago
    From the untrusty coffin of my mind,
    To poison, to corrupt, to strike you there
    Blind with its horror.

                      ULRIC.

                       Leave these bitter words!
    They torture me with terrible suspense,
    And you with fear.  I see by these dread looks,
    Tedious prologues, that there is a truth
    You are afraid to speak. {160B}

                  CORA "(aside)".

                       What subterfuge?
    What shield against the lightning of his love?
    "(Hastily.)"  I have a husband living.

                      ULRIC.

                              Think you, then,
    I have lived so long and looked into you eyes
    To listen to so hastily disgorged
    A prentice falsehood not grown journeyman?
    Then, had you fifty husbands, am I one,
    Reared in the faith of high philosophy,
    Schooled from my childhood in the brotherhood
    Of poets, to descend to this absurd
    Quibble of tedious morality?
    Shame not your truth with that ignoble thought!
    And also -- tell me, once for all, the truth!
                                          ["Bitterly."
    Say that you love him -- it is on your tongue

                      CORA.

    Learn the momentous horror of thy birth!
                                     ["A pause."

                      ULRIC.

    I would not urge my suit against that plea,
    But -- I have known you, and your own pure soul
    Should cast no doubt against me -- you have said
    "Rather we love such as the child of love;
    And pity -- he is not unpitiful
    In this vile system; and respect him too --
    He stands alone, the evidence of Strength!"
    You move your purpose with no bastardy!
    Only you claim to speak the generous thought:
    For you I wait, for you, to offer love! {161A}

                      CORA.

    All is too true -- my own philosophy
    Mars my world's wisdom.  "(Suddenly.)"  Can you tell me why
    I loved you as a child, and why I dare
    Now take your head between my hands and kiss
    Your forehead with these shameful lips of mine,
    These harlot lips, and kiss you unashamed?

                      ULRIC.

    Strange are these words, and this emotion strange!

                      CORA.

    Strange is the truth, and deadly as an asp.

                      ULRIC.

    Wear me no more with this anxiety.

                      CORA.

    How can I speak?  For this will ruin us.

                      ULRIC.

    Unspoken, I demand thy heart of thee.

                      CORA.

    My heart is broken.  This will murder thine.

                      ULRIC.

    Kill, but not torture!  Let me know the truth.

                      CORA.

    This shaft is aimed even against thy life. {161B}

                      ULRIC.

    What is my life without the love of thee?

                      CORA.

    I hate each word as I do hate the devil.

                      ULRIC.

    I, each evasion.  I am bound a slave
    To this wild passion.  I will eat me up.

                      CORA.

    You cannot guess the horror that you speak.
    I tell you, if I know your golden heart,
    This detestation of yourself shall cry
    The cry of OEdipus -- "I have profaned ---"

                      ULRIC.

    What sphinx more cruel?  What new OEdipus?
    You riddle, Cora, and it breaks my heart.
                             ["He sinks exhausted."

    "(Rallying.)"  By God, I swear to you no lie shall keep
    Its Dead Sea bar against our marrying.

                      CORA.

    The truth!  The truth!  The truth!  I am indeed
    That whore I told you.  That makes nothing here.
    I am the mother of thy bastard birth!

    ULRIC "(the conventional criticism is nearest the surface.)".

    Stop! stop!  I did not hear you.  O my God!
    What agony is this?  What have I done
    To earn this infamy?  Or rather, Thou,
    What have I not done?  Have Thou pity yet;
    Sustain me in this vile extremity!
                               ["He prays silently." {162A}

               CORA "(watching him)".

    How wonderful!  He will abide the shock.
    Death and mute horror fight within his face
    Against a will made masterful to Fate.

    ULRIC "(raises his eyes and lifts his arm in act to strike)".

    Then I detest you!  Mother!  Treacherous!
    Vile as the worm that battens on the dead!

                      CORA.

    Ulric!  He's mad!  Sweet heaven! what is this?
       [CORA "is now hysterical."  URIC "does not notice.  She shrieks at each
         new insult."

                      ULRIC.

    Say rather, what are you?  I loved you once
    Childlike; then came the power of reasoning,
    And I beheld you, the unselfish one,
    Befriending me, the angel of my life.
    See what it rested on, my happiness!
    Your sacrifice is utter selfishness;
    Me, the sole pledge of your debaucheries
    You keep -- your love, the mere maternity
    You share with swine and cattle!  All your care
    Is duty: let the harlot cleanse herself --
    Tardy repentance! -- In the name of God!
    Worse, you have lied, and built me up a house
    Of trust in you as being truth and love,
    Who are in truth all lies, all treachery!
    You made me love you as an honest man!
    You watched this passion, this intolerable
    Desire, this flame of hell; you fed it full,
    Sunned it and watered -- O my brain will snap! --
    Only to blast it.  Take your story back; {162B}
    Be what you will except that infamous!
    For as my mother -- I should spit on you!
          [CORA "is at his feet grovelling.  She half rises to listen."
    Ignoble is your foul maternity,
    The cattle-kinship.  But the other crime
    Is viler than the first one.  "Look!" you say:
    "His passion threatens to defile my bed!"
    And put a hideous abiding curse
    On both our lives to save your modesty
    From my incestuous embrace!  O God!
    My love is nobler -- to defy the past,
    Deny! -- your love is merely natural;
    Mine, against Nature, is the love Divine!
    What crime is this?  Thy pale Son's martyrdom
    Cleansed earth from no such vile hypocrisy
    As this my mother's.  And I call thee, God,
    To witness; and I call mankind to hear;
    This is my faith: I live and die by it.
    I, nobler, cast away the infamy,
    Break with my hands these rotten barricades,
          ["He picks up his mother's Bible, tears it, and casts it into the
            fire,"
    And swear before the Spirit of the World,
    In sight of God, this day: I love you still
    With carnal love and spiritual love!
    And I will have you, by the living God,
    To be my mistress.  If I fail in this,
    Or falter in this counsel of despair,
    May God's own curses dog me into hell,
    And mine own life perpetuate itself
    Through all the ages of eternity.
    Amen!  Amen!  Come, Cora, to my heart!
        ["He stoops to embrace her.  Horror and madness catch him, and he
          runs about the room wildly, crying for" CORA, "whom he cannot see."
          MADELINE "enters."

                    MADELINE.

    O Cora!  Cora!  Ulric!  Help!  Help!  Help! {163A}

        ULRIC "(regains his self-control)".

    Hush!  All is well!  I cannot tell you now.
    Some news -- a letter -- it has frightened her.

                    MADELINE.

    But you were crying as a madman would.

                      ULRIC.

    Believe me, I am nervous and distraught.
    You know me, how excitable I am.
    A moment, and you see me calm again.
    Come, Cora, do not frighten Madeline!
          ["He raises her to lead her from the room."

                      CORA.

    Where would you lead me?  I am blind with tears.

                      ULRIC.

    I have no tears.  Mine eyes are hard and cold
    As my intention.  Help me, Madeline.

                      CORA.

    God will avenge me bitterly on you
    If you stretch hand to aid this infamy.

                      ULRIC.

    You shall not wreck her life.  Be silent now!
    Believe me, it is nothing, Madeline!
    She often falls into a fit like this.
    Excess is danger, equally in prayer
    (Her vice is prayer) as in debauchery.
          ["He is again going mad.  He drags" CORA "from the room." {163B}

                    MADELINE.

          [MADELINE "is uncertain what to do during this scene: so fidgets
            about and does nothing."
    It is not illness that hath made them mad.
    I cannot guess what storm has lashed itself
    Thus in one hour from peace and happiness
    To such a fury that the very room
    Seems to my fancy to be tossed about,
    Rocking and whirling on some dizzy sea.
    There is a horrible feeling in the air.
                                   ["She shudders"

                SPIRIT OF TRAGEDY.

          ["During this speech sighs, cries, voices from without indicate the
            action."
    The keystone of this arch of misery
    Is set by the unfaltering hands
    Of Fate.  How desperate the anarchy
    Wrought in one hour!
    The fickle sands
    Run through the glass, and all the light is gone.
    Abysses without name the mighty power
    Spans with spread fingers; on the horizon
    Blood stains the setting sun,
    The shattered sun; it shall not rise again!
    No resurrection to the trampled flower,
    No hope to angels watching as in vain
    Love -- lies -- slain!
    Madness and Terror and the deadly mood of Fortitude,
    A misbegotten brood
    Of all things shameful -- O the desolate eyes
    Of the cold Christ enthroned!  The weeping heaven
    Answers for angels: the oppressive skies
    See them dislink from bodily form and shape,
    Unloved and unforgiven,
    Unwept, unpenitent, unshriven!
    Their hell of horror knows no gate of any escape.
    This tragedy is terrible to me.
    Even I, its spirit, shudder as I see;
    I, passionless, the moulder of men's hope,
    The slayer of the, cast no horoscope {164A}
    Divining what befell.  And I am moved:
    Both love, and both are worthy to be loved,
    Ah Fate! if thou hadst cast the dies
    Whence no appeal, in any other wise!
    I am the soul of the grim face of things:
    Mine are the Sphinx's wings;
    Mine own live lives with this event!
    Yet even I, its very self, lament
    The execrable tyranny,
    The rayless misery
    Of this wild whirlpool sea of circumstance.
    Mine old eyes look askance:
    It is my punishment to dwell
    In mine own self-created hell.
                                [CORA "rushes in."

                    MADELINE.

    What curse of God hath smitten you?  I see
    Exceeding horror in abiding shape
    Blasting the countenance of peace and love
    With some distortion.  O your mouth's awry!

       CORA "(in a hoarse, horrible voice)".

    You cannot tell!  I cannot tell myself.
    Some vital mist of blood is shrouding sight
    From all but my corruption's self.  Come here
    And look within mine eyes, if you can see
    Remembrance that there was a God!  I say
    I see the whole bright universe a tomb,
    With creeping spectres moving in the mist,
    Some suffocating poison that was air.
    O Phaedra!<<1>> lend me of thy wickedness,
    Lest I go mad to contemplate myself!
    I choke -- I grope -- I fall!
                              What name is this
    That strikes my spirit as a broken bell
    Struck by some devilish hammer?  In my brain
    Reverberates some word impossible.
    O I am broken on the wheel of death;
    My bones are ground in some infernal mill;
    My blood is as the venom of a snake,
    Striking each vessel with unwonted pangs,
    Killing all good within me.  I am -- ah! {164B}

<<1. Wife of Theseus, in love with his son Hippolytus, by whom she was repulsed.>>
                    MADELINE.

    Dear friend, dear friend, seek comfort in my arms!
    Look to Our Lady of the Seven Stars!

                      CORA.

    Can you not see?  I am cut off from God!
    Loathsome bull-men in their corruption linked
    Whisper lewd fancies in my ear.  Great fish,
    Monstrous and flat, with vile malignant eyes,
    And crawling beetles of gigantic strength,
    Crushed, mangled, moving,<<1>> are about me.  Go!
    Go! do not touch the carcase of myself
    That is abased, defiled, abominable.

<<1. The descriptions of demons are from a little-known Rabbinical MS. on the "Qliphoth," or shells (larvae) of the dead.  They are known also as the "cut off from God.">>
                    MADELINE.

    O Heart of Jesus!  Thou art bleeding still!
    This was Thy true disciple.  Leave her not,
    Sweet Jesus, in this madness.  Who is this?

        "Enter" ULRIC; "He carries a razor.".

                    ULRIC.<<1>>

<<1. "Cf." the speech of the Dweller of the Threshold in Lytton's"Zanoni.">>

    I have a lovely bride at last, by dear!
    A phantom with intolerable eyes
    Came close and whispered: I am Wisdom's self,
    Thy spouse from everlasting.  Mortal king
    Of my immortal self, I claim thy love!
    So, we are wedded close.  Justice demands
    The punishment of this accursed one,
    Originator of the cruel crimes
    My mother-mistress carried to their close.
    It was your vile affection, Madeline,
    And your perverted hankering for me {165A}
    That caused this thing abominable.  Come!
    I will not hurt you in the killing you!
          ["He catches" MADELINE "gently by the hair, bending back her head."
            CORA "sits thunderstruck, unable to move or speak."]

                    MADELINE.

    Help, Cora, help! he means to murder me!
    Jesus, my Saviour, save them from this deed!
    Help!                 [ULRIC "cuts her throat."

                      ULRIC.

               So perish the Queen's enemies!
    Well, little lover, have I done it well?
    Cora, my sweetheart, we are happy now
    To think our troubles should be ended so
    In perfect love and -- I am feeling ill ---
                [CORA "recovers her mental balance."

                      CORA.

    A blood-grey vapour and a scorpion steam
    To poison the unrighteous life of God!
          [ULRIC "looks on in a completely dazed manner, uncomprehending."

    CORA "(takes razor and puts it in his hand)".
                           Kill yourself.

    ULRIC "(smiling, as if with some divine and ineffable joy, draws the razor
        across his throat, cutting in deeply.  He falls bleeding.)"
                                         My dear!

                      CORA.

    That is my duty to my motherhood.
    Let me now think of all this happening.
          {"She sinks slowly into a chair trembling.  She puts her hand to her
            throat as if choking.  She bites her lip and sits easily back,
            looking straight before her with uncomprehending eyes." {1565B}

{full page below}


                                   CURTAIN.








                       THE TEMPLE OF THE HOLY GHOST.<<1>>

                                    1901.

<<1. At the publisher's suggestion, this volume was split up into"The Soul of Osiris" and "The Mother's Tragedy."  The original design of the poet is now restored.>>

               I. THE COURT OF THE PROFANE.  {col. start below}


                    PROLOGUE.

                    OBSESSION.

              TO CHARLES BAUDELAIRE.

              "Car ce que ta bouche cruelle
                Eparpilie en l'air,
              Monstre assassin, c'est ma cervelle,
                Mon sang et ma chair!"

    THY brazen forehead, and its lustre gloom,
      Great angel of Night's legion chosen chief,
    Beam on me like the hideous-fronted tomb,
      Whereon are graven strange words of misbelief;
    Thy brazen forehead, and its lustre gloom!

    Sinister eyes, you burn into my breast,
      Creating an infernal cavern of woe,
    Where strange sleek leopards lash them in unrest,
      And furtive serpents crawling to and fro --
    Sinister eyes, you burn into my breast!

    All hell, all destinies of death are written
      Like litanies blaspheming in those eyes;
    And where the lightning of high God hath smitten
      Lie the charred brands of monstrous infamies,
    Wherein all destinies of death are written. {166A}

    Thou cam'st to obsess me first that Easter Eve,
      When, from the contemplation of His pain,
    I turned to look into my own heart's heave,
      And saw the bloody nails made fast again.
    Thou cam'st to obsess me first that Easter Eve!

    The lustre of old jet was over thee,
      And through thy body coursed the scented blood;
    Thy flesh was full of amorous ecstasy:
      Polished, and gloomier than some black full flood,
    The lustre of old jet was over thee!

    In thy great brazen blackness I am bathed;
      Through all thy veins, like curses, my blood runs;
    In all thy flesh my naked bones are swathed,
      My womb is pregnant with mad moons and suns.
    In thy great brazen blackness I am bathed!

    Imminent over me thy hatred hangs;
      Thy slow blood trickles on my swollen sides,
    Thy curdling purple where those poison-fangs
      Struck, slays desire; and only death abides.
    Imminent over me thy hatred hangs! {166B}

    Thy jet smooth body clung to mine awhile,
      Descending like the thunder-pregnant night.
    Ominous, black, thy secret cruel smile
      Lured me.  We lay like death; until the light
    Thy jet smooth body clung to mine awhile!

    Thou was a lion as an angel then,
      In copper-glowing lands that gnaws the prey
    He has regotten from the tribes of men.
      We lay like passion all that deadly day --
    Thou wast a lion as an angel then!

    Great angel of the brazen brows, great lover,
      Great hater of my body as my soul,
    To whom I gave my life and love thrice over,
      Fill me one last caress -- the poison-bowl!
    Great angel of the brazen brows, great lover!


                      FAME.

    O IF these words were swords, and I had might
      From some old prophet in whose tawny hair
      The very breath of the Jehovah were
    To smite the Syrian, and to smite, and smite,
    And splash the sun's face with the blood, for spite
      Of his downgoing, till I had made fair
      All glories of my master, I could bear
    To sink myself in the abundant night.

    O if these words were lightnings, and their flame
    Deluged the world, and drowned the seed of shame
      In these ill waters where alone Truth's ark
      May float, where only lovers may embark,
    I were contented to abandon fame
      And live with love for ever in the dark. {167A}


          THE MOTHER AT THE SABBATH.<<1>>

<<1. The Sabbath of the Witches.  The reader should consult Payne Knight, "Two Essays on the Worship of Priapus"; Eliphaz Levi, "Historie de la Magie" and "Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie"; P. Christian, "Histoire de la Magie"; and Goethe, "Faust."  Also J. Glanvil, "Saducismus Triumphatus.">>


    COME, child of wonder! it is Sabbath Night,
    The speckled twilight and the sombre singing!
    Listen and come: the owl's disastrous flight
    Points out the road!  Hail, O propitious sight!
    See! the black gibbet and the murderer swinging!

    Come, child of wonder and the innocent eyes!
    Come where the toad his stealthy way is taking.
    Flaps the bat's wing upon thy cheek?  How wise,
    How wicked are those faces!  And the skies
    Are muffled, and the firmament is quaking.

    Spectres of cats misshapen nestle close,
    And rub their phantom sides against our dresses.
    Come, child of wonder! in these souls morose
    Keen joys may shudder -- how the daylight goes! --
    Night shall betray thee to the cold caresses!

    Yes; it is night the hour of subtlety
    And strange looks meaning more than Hell can utter: --
    Come, child of wonder! watch the woman's eye
    Who lurks towards us through the stagnant sky.
    Hark to the words her serpents hiss or mutter! {167B}

    Close we are come; before us is the Cross
    To trample and defile: the bones shall shudder
    Of many a self-slain darling.  From the moss
    Swamp-adders greet us.  How the dancers toss
    The frantic limb, the unreluctant udder!

    See, how their frenzy peoples all the ground!
    Strange demon-shapes take up the unholy measure,
    Strange beast and worm and crab: the uncouth sound
    Of the unheard-of-kisses: the profound
    Gasps of the maniac, the devouring pleasure!

    A curse of God is on them! -- ha! the curse,
    The curse that locks them in obscene embraces!
    See how love mocks the melancholy hearse
    Dressed as an altar: is she nun or nurse,
    The priestess chosen of the half-formed faces?

    An abbess, child of the unsullied eyes!
    Why?  To blaspheme!  Sweet child, the dance grows madder.
    O I am faint with pleasure!  Ah! be wise;
    One measure more, and then -- the sacrifice?
    What victim?  Guess -- a woman or an adder?

    Nay, fear not, baby!  In your mother's hand
    You must be safe?  You trust the womb that bare you!
    Who comes towards us?  Why, our God, the Grand!
    Our Baphomet!<<1>>  Come, baby, to the band:
    Our God may kiss you  -- yes, he will not spare you! {168A}

<<1. Supposed to be the abbreviation of the Templar's Order spelt          backwards: Tem. o. h. p. ab. = Templi Omnium hominum pacis pater (Heb. Ab, father).  Some assert the word to be really a synthesis of a great body of secret doctrine, discoverable by any one who knows the Qabalistic meaning of each letter.>>

    Fall down, my baby; worship him with me.
    There, go; I give you to his monster kisses!
    Take her, my God, my God, my infamy,
    My love, my master! take the fruit of me!
    -- Shrieks every soul and every demon hisses!

    Out! out! the ghastly torches of the feast!
    Let darkness hide us and the night discover
    The shameless mysteries of God grown beast,
    The nameless blasphemy, the slimed East --
    Sin incarnated with a leprous lover!

    "Hoc est enim"<<1>> -- the victim! ah! my womb,
    My womb has borne the victim!  Now I queen it
    To-night upon the damned -- thy love makes room,
    My goat-head godhead, for my hecatomb!
    I am thy mistress, and thy slaves have seen it!

<<1. "Hoc est enim corpus meum," the words used in the Mass at the elevation of the Host.>>

    Even as thy cold devouring kisses roll
    Over my corpse; I hear its death-cry thrill me!
    Thine! -- O my god!  I render thee the whole,
    My broken body and my accursed soul!
    Come, come, come, come!  Ah! conquer me and kill me!


                 THE BRIDEGROOM.

    No passion stirs the cool white throat of her;
      No living glory fills the deep dead eyes;
        No sleep that breaks her Southern indolence;
    Not all the breezes out of heaven, that stir
      The sleepy wells and woodlands, bid her rise;
        Nor all a godhead's amorous violence.
        She is at peace; we will go hence. {168B}

    Warm wealth of draperies, the broidered room,
      And delicate tissues of pale silk that shine
        About her bed: all kiss the dead girl's face
    With shadowy reluctances that gloom
      Over and under, and the cold divine
        Presence of Death bedews the quiet place.
          She was so gracious; she was grace.

    Once, in the long insidious hours that steal
      Through summer's pleasant kingdom, she would weave
        Such songs, such murmurs of the dusky breeze
    That passed, like silken tapestries that feel
      The silkier cheeks of maidens as they cleave
        Tender to patient lovers, for the ease
        Of lips fulfilled of harmonies.

    Such songs were hers.  What song is hers to-night
      When she is smitten in her bridal bed,
        Because I would not trust the God that gave
    Her smooth virginity to godlier might,
      My glory?  There she lies divine and dead
        Because I would not trust the sullen wave
        Of time; and chose this way -- her grave.

    I had not thought the poison left her so --
      Smiling, enticing, exquisite.  I meant
        Rather that beauty to destroy, to leave
    No subtle languors on that breast of snow,
      No curves by God's caressing finger bent,
        To bid me think of her: I would deceive
        My memory -- now I can but grieve.

    Perhaps our happiness, despite of all,
      Would have grown comelier and never tired;
        Perhaps the pitiful pale face had been {169A}
    Alway my true wife's; let me not recall
      Her first shy glance!  This woman I desired,
        And sealed my own for ever by this keen
        Death that crowns her Death's queen.

    Death's and not mine: I was a fool to kiss
      Her dead lips -- ay, her living lips for that!
        I cannot bid her rise and live again.
    I would not.  Nay, I know not; for is this
      My triumph or my ruin, satiate
        Of death, insatiate alway of pain?
        What have I done?  In vain, in vain!

    I will not look at her; I dare not stay.
      I will go down and mingle with the throng,
        Find some debasing dulling sacrifice,
    Some shameless harlot with thin lips grown grey
      In desperate desire, and so with song
        And wine fling hellward.  Yes, she does not rise --

        O if she opened once her eyes!


              THE ALTAR OF ARTEMIS.

    WHERE, in the coppice, oak and pine
      With mystic yew and elm are found,
    Sweeping the skies, that grow divine
      With the dark wind's despairing sound,
      The wind that roars from the profound,
    And smites the mountain-tops, and calls
    Mute spirits to black festivals,
      And feasts in valleys iron-bound,
      Desolate crags, and barren ground; --
    There in the strong storm-shaken grove
    Swings the pale censer-fire for love.

    The foursquare altar, rightly hewn,
      And overlaid with beaten gold,
    Stands in the gloom; the stealthy tune
      Of singing maidens overbold
      Desires mad mysteries untold, {169B}
    With strange eyes kindling, as the fleet
    Implacable untiring feet
      Weave mystic figures manifold
      That draw down angels to behold
    The moving music, and the fire
    Of their intolerable desire.

    For, maddening to fiercer thought,
      The fiery limbs requicken, wheel
    In formless furies, subtly wrought
      Of swifter melodies than steel
      That flashes in the fight: the peal
    Of amorous laughters choking sense,
    And madness kissing violence,
      Rings like dead horsemen; bodies reel
      Drunken with motion; spirits feel
    The strange constraint of gods that dip
    From Heaven to mingle lip and lip.

    The gods descent to dance; the noise
      Of hungry kissings, as a swoon,
    Faints for excess of its own joys,
      And mystic beams assail the moon,
      With flames of their infernal noon;
    While the smooth incense, without breath,
    Spreads like some scented flower of death,
      Over the grove; the lover's boon
      Of sleep shall steal upon them soon,
    And lovers' lips, from lips withdrawn,
    Seek dimmer bosoms till the dawn.

    Yet on the central altar lies
      The sacrament of kneaded bread
    With blood made one, the sacrifice
      To those, the living, who are dead --
      Strange gods and goddesses, that shed
    Monstrous desires of secret things
    Upon their worshippers, from wings
      One lucent web of light, from head
      One labyrinthine passion-fed
    Palace of love, from breathing rife
    With secrets of forbidden life.

    But not the sunlight, nor the stars,
      Nor any light but theirs alone,
    Nor iron masteries of Mars,
      Nor Saturn's misconceiving zone,
      Nor any planet's may be shone, {170A}
    Within the circle of the grove,
    Where burn the sanctities of love:
      Nor may the foot of man be known,
      Nor evil eyes of mothers thrown
    On maidens that desire the kiss
    Only of maiden Artemis.

    But horned and huntress from the skies,
      She bends her lips upon the breeze,
    And pure and perfect in her eyes,
      Burn magical virginity's
      Sweet intermittent sorceries.
    When the slow wind from her sweet word
    In all their conched ears is heard.
      And like the slumber of the seas,
      There murmur through the holy trees
    The kisses of the goddess keen,
    And sighs and laughters caught between.

    For, swooning at the fervid lips
      Of Artemis, the maiden kisses
    Sob, and the languid body slips
      Down to enamelled wildernesses.
      Fallen and loose the shaken tresses;
    Fallen the sandal and girdling gold,
    Fallen the music manifold
      Of moving limbs and strange caresses,
      And deadly passion that possesses
    The magic ecstasy of these
    Mad maidens, tender as blue seas.

    Night spreads her yearning pinions;
      The baffled day sinks blind to sleep;
    The evening breeze outswoons the sun's
      Dead kisses to the swooning deep.
      Upsoars the moon; the flashing steep
    Of heaven is fragrant for her feet;
    The perfume of the grove is sweet
      As slumbering women furtive creep
      To bosoms where small kisses weep,
    And find in fervent dreams the kiss
    Most memoried of Artemis.

    Impenetrable pleasure dies
      Beneath the madness of new dreams;
    The slow sweet breath is turned to sighs
      More musical than many streams
      Under the moving silver beams, {170}
    Fretted with stars, thrice woven across.
    White limbs in amorous slumber toss
      Like sleeping foam, whose silver gleams
      On motionless dark seas; it seems
    As if some gentle spirit stirred
    Their lazy brows with some swift word.

    So, in the secret of the shrine,
      Night keeps them nestled; so the gloom
    Laps them in waves as smooth as wine,
      As glowing as the fiery womb
      Of some young tigress, dark as doom,
    And swift as sunrise.  Love's content
    Builds its own mystic monument,
      And carves above its vaulted tomb
      The Phoenix on her fiery plume,
    To their own souls to testify
    Their kisses' immortality.


             THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE.

    O CRIMSON cheeks of love's fierce fever!
      O amber skin, electric to the kiss!
      O eyes of sin!  O bosom of my bliss!
    Sorrow, the web, is spun of Love the weaver.

    Twelve moons have circled in their seasons;
      The earth has swept, exultant, round the sun;
      Our love has slept, and, sleeping, made us one.
    The thirteenth moon, be sure, the time of treasons!

    Another spirit waves its pinions.
      Love vanishes: we hate each other's sight.
      In sullen seas sinks our sun-flaming light,
    Darkness is master of the dream-dominions.

    Lo! in thy womb a child!  How rotten
      Seems love to me who love it as my soul!
      The love of thee hath broken its control,
    The misconceived become the misbegotten. {171A}

    In thee the love of me is broken.
      Fear, hatred, pain, discomfort mock thy days;
      Thou canst disdain; these solitary bays
    Twine with decaying myrtles for a token.

    Dislike, disgust (you say repulsers)
      Link me to thee despite  -- because of -- this
      Skeleton key to charnel-house.  My kiss
    Is the dog's kiss to Lazarus his ulcers!

    Mock me, ye clinging lovers, at your peril!
      God turns to dust the blossom of your youth.
      The fruit of lust is poisonous with -- truth!
    Its immortality is -- to be sterile!

    This lie of Love hath no abiding:
      "Two loves are ended; one, the infant band,
      Rises more splendid."  Spin the rope of sand!
    Two loves are one; but O to their dividing!

    Fertility -- distaste's adoption!
      Her body's growth -- desire's mortality!
      I look and loathe.  Behold how lovers die,
    And immortality puts on corruption!


                   ASMODEL.<<1>>

<<1. One of the "Intelligences" of the Planet Venus.>>

    CALL down the star whose tender eyes
      Were on thy bosom at thy birth!
    Call, one long passionate note that sighs!
      Call, till its beauty bend to earth,
    Meet thee and lift thee and devise
      Strange loves within the gleaming girth,
    And kisses underneath the star
    Where on her brows its seven rays are.

    Call her, the maiden of thy sleep,
      And fashion into human shape
    The whirling fountains fiery and deep,
      The incense-columns that bedrape {171B}
    Her glimmering limbs, when shadows creep
      Among blue tresses that escape
    The golden torque that binds her hair,
    Whose swarthy splendours drench the air.

    She comes! she comes!  The spirit glances
      In quick delight to hold her kiss;
    The fuming air shimmers and dances;
      The moonlight's trembling ecstasies
    Swoon; and her soul, as my soul, trances,
      Knowing no longer aught that is;
    Only united, moving, mixed,
    A music infinitely fixed.

    Music that throbs, and soars, and burns,
      And breaks the possible, to dwell
    One moving monotone, nor turns,
      Making hell heaven, and heaven hell,
    The steady impossible song that yearns
      And brooks no mortal in its swell --
    This monotone immortal lips
    Make in our infinite eclipse!

    Formless, above all shape and shade;
      Lampless, beyond all light and flame;
    Timeless, above all age and grade;
      Moveless, beyond the mighty name;
    A mystic mortal and a maid,
      Filled with all things to fill the same,
    To overflow the shores of God,
    Mingling our proper period.

    The agony is passed: behold
      How shape and light are born again;
    How emerald and starry gold
      Burn in the midnight; how the pain
    Of our incredible marriage-fold
      And bed of birthless travail wane;
    And how our molten limbs divide,
    And self and self again abide.

    The agony of extreme joy,
      And horror of the infinite blind
    Passions that sear us and destroy,
      Rebuilding for the deathless mind {172}
    A deathless body, whose alloy
      Is gold and fire, whose passions find
    The tears of their caress a dew,
    Fiery, to make creation new.

    This agony and bloody sweat,
      This scarring torture of desire,
    Refine us, madden us, and set
      The feast of unbegotten fire
    Before our mouths, that mingle yet
      In this; the mighty-moulded lyre
    Of many stars still strikes above
    Chords of the mastery of love.

    This subtle fire, this secret flame,
      Flashes between us as she goes
    Beyond the night, beyond the Name,
      Back to her unsubstantial snows;
    Cold, glittering, intense, the same
      Now, yesterday, for aye!  she glows
    No woman of my mystic bed;
    A star, far off, forgotten, dead.

    Only to me looks out for ever
      From her cold eyes a fire like death;
    Only to me her breasts can never
      Lose the red brand that quickeneth;
    Only to me her eyelids sever
      And lips respire her equal breath;
    Still in the unknown star I see
    The very god that is of me.

    The day's pale countenance is lifted,
      The rude sun's forehead he uncovers;
    No soft delicious clouds have drifted,
      No wing of midnight's bird that hovers;
    Yet still the hard blind blue is rifted,
      And still my star and I as lovers
    Year to each other through the sky
    With eyes half closed in ecstasy.

    Night, Night, O mother Night, descend!
      O daughter of the sleeping sea!
    O dusk, O sister-spirit, lend
      Thy wings, thy shadows, unto me! {172B}
    O mother, mother, mother, bend
      And shroud the world in mystery
    That secrets of our bed forbidden
    Cover their faces, and be hidden!

    O steadfast, O mysterious bride!
      O woman, O divine and dead!
    O wings immeasurably wide!
      O star, O sister of my bed!
    O living lover, at my side
      Clinging, the spring, the fountain-head
    Of musical slow waters, white
    With thousand-folded rays of light!

    Come!  Once again I call, I call,
      I call, O perfect soul, to thee,
    With chants, and murmurs mystical,
      And whispers wiser than the sea:
    O lover, come to me!  The pall
      Of night is woven: fair and free,
    Draw to my kisses; let thy breath
    Mingle for love the wine of death!


           MADONNA OF THE GOLDEN EYES.

    NIGHT brings madness; moonlight dips her throat to madden us;
    Love's swift purpose darts, the flash of a striking adder.
    Love that kills and kisses dwells above to sadden us;
    Dawn brings reason back and the violet eyes grows sadder.
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!

    Swooned the deep sunlight above the summer stream;
    Droned the sleepy dragon-fly by the water spring;
    Stood we in the noontide in a misty dream,
    Fearful of our voices, of some sudden thing.
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes! {173A}

    Dared we whisper?  Dared we lift our eyes to see there
    In their desperate depth some mutual flame of treason?
    Dared we move apart?  So glad were we to be there,
    Nothing in the world might change the constant season.
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!

    Did a breath of wind disturb the lazy day?
    Did a soul of fear flit phantom-wise across?
    Suddenly we clasped and clave as spirit unto clay;
    Suddenly love swooped to us as swoops the albatross.
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!

    Did thy husband's venom breathe on the trembling scale?
    Did that voice corrupting cry across the midnight air?
    What decided?  Gabriel may spin the foolish tale.
    What decided?  We were lovers -- who should care?
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!

    How we clave together!  How we strained caresses!
    How the swooning limbs sank fainting on the sward!
    For the fiery dart raged fiercer; in excesses
    Long restrained, it cried, "Behold! I am the Lord!"
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!

    Yes, we sat with modest eyes and murmuring lips
    Downcast at the table, while the husband drank his wine.
    So thy sly, slow hand stretched furtively; there slips
    Deadly in his throat the poison draught divine!
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes! {173B}

    Then we left his carcase with the stealthy tread
    Reverent, in presence of the silent place;
    Then you burned, afire, caught up the ghastly head,
    Looked like Hell right into it, and sat upon the face!
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!

    "Come with me," you whispered, "come, and let the moon
    Lend her light to madden us through the hours of pleasure;
    Let the dayspring pass and brighten into noon!
    Yet no limit find our love, nor passion find a measure!"
          O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!

    Dawn brought reason back, and the violet eyes are sadder: --
    O they were golden once, and I call them golden still!
    Dawn has brought remorse, the sting of a foul swamp-adder --
    I hate you! beast of Hell!  I have snapped Love's manacle!
          O Murderess of the Golden Eyes!

    O and you fix them on me! your lips curse now -- 'tis fitter!
    Snarl on! eat out your heart with the poison that is its blood.
    Speak! and her lips move now with blasphemies cruel and bitter.
    Slow the words creep forth as a sleepy and deadly flood.
          They glitter, those Satanic eyes!

    "Beast!  I gave you my soul and my body to all your lust!
    Beast!  I am damned in Hell for the kisses we sucked from death!
    Now remorse is yours, and love is fallen in dust --
    I shall seek Him again for its sacramental breath!
          Yes, fear the gold that glitters from these eyes!" {174A}

    She took a dagger, and I could not stir.
    She pierced my silent fascinated breast.
    She held me with the deadly look of her.
    I cried to Mary in the House of Rest;
          "O Madonna of the Virgin eyes!"
                 *      *      *
    I pierced him to the very soul: I took
    His whole life's love to me before he died;
    Mad kisses mingled that enduring look
    Of death-caught passion: in his death he cried,
          "O Madonna of the Golden Eyes!"


                  LOVE AT PEACE.

        THE valleys, that are splendid
        With sun ere day is ended
          And love-lutes take to tune,
        See joyless and unfriended
        The perfect bowstring bended,
          Whose bow is called the moon.
        They see the waters slacken
        And all the sky's blue blacken,
        While in the yellow bracken
          Love lies in death or swoon.

        The stars arise and brighten;
        The summer lightnings lighten,
          Faint and as midnight mute.
        Afar the snowfields tighten
        The iron bands that frighten
          No fairy's tender foot.
        Across the stiller river
        Stray flowers of ice may shiver,
        Before the day deliver
          The murmur of its lute.

        The sleep of bird and flower
        Proclaims that Heaven has power
          To guard its gentlest child.
        The lover knows the hour,
        And goes with dew for dower
          To wed in woodland wild.
        The silvern grasses shake,
        And through the startled brake
        Glides the awakened snake,
          Untamable and mild. {174B}

        The song of stars; the wail
        Of women wild and pale,
          Forlorn and not forsaken;
        The tremulous nightingale;
        The waters wan that fail
          By frost-love overtaken,
        Make sacred all the valley;
        And softly, musically,
        The breezes lull and rally;
          The pine stirs and is shaken.

        Beneath whose sombre shade
        I hold a lazy maid
          In chaste arms and too tender.
        Lo! she is fair!  God said;
        And saw through the deep glade
          How sweet she was and slender.
        But I -- could I behold her
        Curved shapeliness of shoulder?
        I, whose strong arms enfold her
          Immaculate surrender.

        Pure as the dawns that quicken
        On snow-topped mountains stricken
          By first gray light that grows,
        By beams that gather, thicken,
        A web of fairy ticken<<1>>
          To make a fairy rose:
        Pure as the seas that lave
        With phosphorescent wave
        The sombre architrave
          Of Castle No-man-knows.

<<1. A closely woven fabric.>>

        Pure as the dreams, undreamt
        (That men have in contempt,
          That wise men yearn to see),
        Of angel forms exempt
        From mockeries that tempt
          Who fly about the lea;
        Proclaiming things unheard.
        Unknown to brightest bird,
        Things, whose unspoken word
          Is utmost secrecy. {175A}

        So pure, so pale we lie,
        Like angels eye to eye,
          Like lovers lip to lip.
        So, the elect knight, I
        Keep vigil to the sky,
          While the dumb moments slip.
        So she, my bride, my queen,
        So virginal, so keen,
        Swoons, while the moon-rays lean
          To fan their silver ship.

        No sleep, but precious kisses
        In those pale wildernesses,
          Mark the dead hours of night,
        No sleep so sweet as this is,
        Whose pulse of purple blisses
          Beats calm and cool and light.
        No life so fair with roses,
        No day so swift to close is;
        No cushion so reposes
          Fair love so sweet and slight.


                MORS JANUA AMORIS.

      "None but the dead can know the worth of Love." -- KELLY.

      IN the night my passion fancies
        That an incense vapour whirls,
      That a cloud of perfume trances
        With its dreamy vapour-curls
      All my soul, with whom their dances
        The one girl of mortal girls.
      The one girl whose wanton glances
        Soften into living pearls
    Comes, a fatal, fleeting vision,
    Turns my kisses to derision,
    Smiles upon my breast, and sighs,
    Flits, and laughs, and fades, and dies.

      By the potent starry speeches;
        By the spells of mystic kings;
      By the magic passion teaches;
        By the strange and sacred things {175B}
      By whose power the master reaches
        To the stubborn fiery springs;
      By the mystery of the beaches
        Where the siren Sibyl sings;
    I will hold her, live and bleeding;
    Clasp her to me, pale and pleading;
    Hold her in a human shape;
    Hold her safe without escape!

      So I put my spells about her
        As she flew into my dreams;
      So I drew her to the outer
        Land of unforgetful streams;
      So I laid her (who should doubt her?)
        Where enamelled verdure gleams,
      Drew her spirit from without her!
        In her eyelids stellar beams
    Glow renascent, now I hold her
    Breast to breast, and shining shoulder
    Laid to shoulder, in the bliss
    Of the uncreated kiss.

      Lips to lips beget for daughters
        Little kisses of the breeze;
      Limbs entwined with limbs, the waters
        Of incredible blue seas;
      Eyes that understand, the slaughters
        Of a thousand ecstasies
      Re-embodied, as they wrought us
        Garlands of strange sorceries;
    New desires and mystic passion
    Infinite, of starry fashion;
    The mysterious desire
    Of the subtle formless fire.

      Vainly may the Tyanaean<<1>>
       Throw his misconceiving eye
      To bewitch our empyrean
        Splendours of the under sky!
      If the loud infernal paean
        Be our marriage-melody,
      We are careless, we Achaean
        Moulders of our destiny. {176A}
    Hell, it may be, for his playing,
    Renders Orpheus the decaying
    Love -- in Hell, if Hell there be,
    I would seek Eurydice!

<<1. Apollonius of Tyana, the sage whose glance dissolved the illusion which Lamia had cast about herself.  See Keats's poem.>>

      If she be the demon sister
        Of my brain's mysterious womb;
      If she brand my soul and blister
        Me with kisses of the tomb;
      If she drag me where the bistre
        Vaults of Hell gape wide in gloom;
      Little matter!  I have kissed her!
        Little matter! as a loom
    She has woven love around me,
    As with burning silver bound me,
    Held me to her scented skin
    For an age of deadly sin!

      So I fasten to me tighter
        Fetters on her limbs that fret;
      So my kisses kindle brighter,
        Fiercer, flames of Hell, and set
      Single, silent, as a mitre
        Blasphemous, a crown of jet
      On our foreheads, paler, whiter
        Than the snowiest violet.
    So I forge the chains of fire
    Round our single-souled desire.
    Heaven and Hell we reck not of,
    Being infinite in love.

      Come, my demon-spouse, to fashion
        The fantastic marriage-bed!
      Let the starry billows splash on
        Both our bodies, let them shed
      Dewfall, as the streams Thalassian
        On Selene's fallen head!
      Let us mingle magic passion,
        Interpenetrating, dead,
    Deathless, O my dead sweet maiden!
    Lifeless, in the secret Aidenn!<<1>>
    Let our bodies meet and mix
    On the spirit's crucifix! {176B}

<<1. This word is taken direct from Poe's "Raven" in the sense in which it is used by him.>>


                THE MAY QUEEN.<<1>>

                   (OLD STYLE)

<<1. See Frazer, "The Golden Bough," for proof of the universality of the ritual described.  The parallelism is accidental, Crowley having read no sociology at this time.>>

    IT is summer and sun on the sea,
      The twilight is drawn to the world:
    We linger and laugh on the lea,
    The light of my spirit with me,
      Sharp limbs in close agony curled.

    The noise of the music of sleep,
      The breath of the wings of the night,
    The song of the magical deep,
    The sighs of the spirits that weep,
      Make murmur to tune our delight.

    Slow feet are our measures that move;
      Swift songs are more soft than the breeze;
    Our mouths are made mute for our love;
    Our eyes are made soft as the dove;
      We mingle and move as the seas.

    The light of the passionate dawn
      That kissed us, and would not awaken,
    Grew golden and bold on the lawn;
    The rays of the sun are withdrawn
      At last, and the blossoms are shaken.

    Oh, fragrant the breeze is that stirs
      The grasses around us that lean!
    Oh, sweet is the whisper that purrs
    From those wonderful lips that are hers,
      From the passionate lips of a queen.

    A queen is my lover, I say,
      With a crown of the lilies of light --
    For a maiden they crowned her in May,
    For the Queen of the Daughters of Day
      That are flowers of the forest of Night.

    They crowned her with lilies and blue,
      They crowned her with yellow and roses;
    They gave her a sceptre of rue,
    And a girdle of laurel and yew,
      And a basket of pansies in posies. {177A}

    They led her with songs by the stream;
      They brought her with tears to the river;
    They danced as the maze of a dream;
    They kissed her to roses and cream,
      And they cried, "Let the queen live for ever!"

    They took her, with all of the flowers
      They had girded her with for God's daughter;
    They cast her from amorous bowers
    To the river, the horrible powers
      Of the Beast that lurks down by the Water!

    My was was more swift than a bow
      That flings out its barb to the night:
    My sword struck the infinite blow
    That smote him, and blackened the flow
      Of the amorous river of light.

    I plunged in the stream, and I drew
      My queen from the clasp of the water;
    I crowned her with roses and blue,
    With yellow and lilies anew;
      I called her my love and God's daughter!

    I gave her a sceptre of may;
      I gave her a girdle of green;
    I drew her to music and day;
    I led her the beautiful way
      To the land where the Winds lie between.

    So still lingers sun upon sea;
      Still twilight draws down to the world;
    The light of my spirit is she;
    The soul of her love is in me;
      Lithe kisses with music are curled.

    Like light on the meadows we dwell;
      Like twilight clings heart unto heart;
    Like midnight the depth of the spell
    Our love weaves, and stronger than hell
      The guards of our palace of art.

    We are one as the dew that is drawn
      By the sun from the sea: we are curled
    In curves of delight an of dawn,
    On the lone, the immaculate lawn,
      Beyond the wild way of the world. {177B}


            SIDONIA THE SORCERESS.<<1>>

<<1. For her history see Wilhelm Meinhold.>>


    SIDONIA the Sorceress!  I revel in her amber skin,
      Dream in her eyes and die in her caress.
    She is for me the avatar of sin,
      Sidonia the Sorceress.

    The one unpardonable wickedness,
      Strange serpent-blasphemies, are curled within
    The heart of her Hell gives me to possess.

    Her hair is fastened with a dagger thin;
      A dead man's heart is woven with each tress.
    I murdered Christ before my lips could win
      Sidonia the Sorceress.


                THE GROWTH OF GOD.

    (AS DEVELOPED ON A MOONLESS NIGHT IN THE TROPICS.)<<1>>

<<1. When Crowley was benighted on the way from Iguala to Mexico City, whither he was riding unattended.>>

    EVEN as beasts, where the sepulchral ocean
      Sobs, and their fins and feet keep Runic pace,
    Treading in water mysteries of motion,
      Witch-dances: where the ghastly carapace
    Of the blind sky hangs on the monstrous verge:
      Even as serpents, wallowing in the slime;
    So my thoughts raise misshapen heads, and urge
      Horrible visions of decaying Time.

    For in the fiery dusk arise distorted
      Grey shapes in moonless phosphorus glow of death;
    The keen light of the eyes thrust back and thwarted,
      The quick scent stabbed by the miasma breath. {178A}
    The day is over, when the lizard darted,
      A flash of green, the emerald outclassed;
    Night is collapsed upon the vale: departed
      All but the Close, suggestive of the Vast.

    The heavy tropic scent-inspiring gloom
      Clothes the wide air, the circumambient aether.
    The earth grins open, as it were a tomb,
      And struggling earthquakes gnash their teeth beneath her.
    The night is monstrous: in the flickering fire
      Strange faces gibber as the brands burn low;
    Old shapes of hate, young phantoms of desire
      More hateful yet, shatter and change and grow.

    There is a sense of terror in the air,
      And dreadful stories catch my breath and bind me,
    Soft noises as of breathing: unaware
      What devils or what ghosts may lurk behind me!
    Even my horse is troubled: vain it is
      Invoking memory for sweet sound of youth;
    The song, the day, the cup, the shot, the kiss!
      This night begets illusion -- ay! the truth.

    I know the deep emotion of that birth,
      When chaos rolled in terror and in thunder;
    The abortion of the infancy of earth;
      The monsters moving in a world of wonder;
    The Shapeless, racked with agony, that grew
      Into these phantom forms that change and shatter;
    The falling of the first toad-spotted dew;
      The first lewd heaving ecstasy of matter.

    I see all Nature claw and tear and bite,
      All hateful love and hideous: and the brood
    Misshapen, misbegotten out of spite;
      Lust after death; love in decreptitude. {178B}
    Thus, till the monster-birth of serpent-man
      Linked in corruption with the serpent-woman,
    Slavering in lust and pain -- creation's ban.
      The horrible beginning of the human.

    The savage monkey leaping on his mate;
      The upright posture for sure murder taken;
    The gibberings modified to spit out hate:
      Struggle to manhood -- surely God-forsaken.
    The bestial cause of Morals -- fear and hate.
      At last the anguish-vomit of despair,
    The growth of reason -- and its pangs abate
      No whit: the knife replaces the arm bare.

    Fear grows, and torment; and distracted pain
      Must from sheer agony some respite find;
    When some half-maddened miserable brain
      Projects a God in his detesting mind.
    A God who made him -- to the core all evil,
      In his own image -- and a God of Terror;
    A vast foul nightmare, and impending devil;
      Compact of darkness, infamy, and error.

    Some bestial woman, beaten by her mates,
      In utter fear broke down the bar of reason;
    Shrieked, crawled to die; delirium abates
      By some good chance her terror in its season.
    Her ravings picture the cessation of
      Such life as she had known: her mind conceives
    A God of Mercy, Happiness, and Love;
      Reverses life and fact: and so believes.

    So man grew up; and so religion grew.
      Now in the aeons shall not truth dissever
    The man and maker, smite the old lie through,
      Cast God to black oblivion for ever?
    Picture no longer in fallacious thought
      A doer for each deed! the real lurks
    Nowhere thus hidden: there is truly nought
      Substantial in these unsubstantial works. {179A}

    But work thou ever!  Thou who art or art not,
      Work that the fever of thy life abate;
    Work! though for weary ages thou depart not,
      At last abideth the sequestered state.
    Sure is the search! O seeker, as the bird,
      Homing through distant skies toward its rest,
    Shall surely find -- and thou shalt speak the word
      At last that shall dissolve thee into rest.


               TO RICHARD WAGNER.

    O MASTER of the ring of love, O lord
      Of all desires, and king of all the stars,
      O strong magician, who with locks and bars
    Dost seal that kingdom silent and abhorred
    That stretches out and binds with iron cord
      The hopes and lives of men, and makes and mars!
      O thou thrice noble for the deadly scars
    That answered vainly thy victorious sword!

    Wagner! creator of a world of light
      As beautiful as God's, bend down to me.
        And whisper me the secrets of thy heart,
    That I may follow and dispel the night,
      And fight life through, a comrade unto thee,
        Under Love's banner with the sword of Art!


                THE TWO EMOTIONS.

    HOW barren is the Valley of Delight!
    Swift the gaunt hounds that nose the warm close trail
    Of all my love's content; in vain I veil
    My secret of remorse; from their keen sight
    And scent my poor deception takes to flight.
    I borrow perfume from young loves waxed pale;
    I borrow music from the nightingale.
    In vain: she knows me, and I hate he quite. {179B}
    Not altogether: in my patchwork brain
    Some rag of passion tears its woof asunder.
    Strange, that its own insatiable pain
    Should find an opiate in her eyes of wonder!
    Yes, though I hate her well enough to kill,
    I know that then my soul would love her still.


                   THE SONNET.

                        I.

    THE solemn hour, and the magnetic swoon
      Of midnight in a poet's lonely hall!
      Grave spirits answer (angels if he call)
    The invocation of his lofty tune.
    Thus in his measure nature craves the boon
      To be reflected; and his rhymes appal
      Or charm mankind as tides that flow or fall,
    Waxes or wanes the tempestival moon.

    Her course is measured in the sonnet's tether.
      Waxes the eightfold ecstasy; exceeds
      The minor sestet, where some passion bleeds
        Or truth discovers: or eclipse may end,
        Proof against thought; but if man comprehend
    The stars is all their stations sing together.


                       II.

    What power or fascination can there lie
      In this fair garden of the straight-kept rows,
      The sonnet?  Surely some archangel knows
    Why, having written in mere ecstasy
    One sonnet-thought, the metre cannot die
      But urges, but compels me to compose
      More and still more,<<1>> and still my spirit goes
    Striving up glittering steeps of symphony. {180A}

    There is an angel who is guardian.
      Surely her wings are rosy, and her feet
        Black as the wind of frost; but oh! her face!
    Whoso may know it is no more a man,
      But walks with God, and sees the Lady sweet
        Whose body was the vehicle of grace.

<<1. This is a singular psychological fact.>>


                     WEDLOCK.

                    A SONNET.

    I SAW the Russian peasants<<1>> build a ring
      Of glowing embers of the bubbling pine.
      In the green heart o' the salamander line
    They scatter roses.  Now the youngsters spring
    Within, who with hard-shut eyes hope to bring
      From out the fiery circle one divine
      Blossom of rose, as from a poisonous mine
    Gold comes to gird the palace of a king.

    Envious I sprang -- and found the last rose gone.
      So in the fiery ring of wedlock, blind,
      Mad, one may leap, no rose perhaps to find
    (Or, if no rose, good fortune finds no thorn),
      But -- mark the difference -- palpable and plain:
      Rose or no rose, one leaps not out again.

<<1. In my mind's eye, Horatio.  The story is a pretty fiction.>>


