
055/068 Sat 16 Sep 1989 18:10:00
From:   Aleister Crowley
To:     All
Subj:   Liber Ru Vel Spiritus
Attr:   local 
Metaphysical------------------------------------
* Original: FROM.....Tony Iannotti (107/666)
* Original: TO.......Larry (107/666)
* Forwarded by.......OPUS 107/666

                              LIBER RV
                                vel
                              SPIRITUS
 
                           SUB FIGURA CCVI.
 
 
    2. Let the Zelator observe the current of his breath.
    3. Let him investigate the following statements, and prepare a careful
 record of research.
    (a) Certain actions induce the flow of the breath through the right
 nostril (Pingala); and, conversely, the flow of the breath through Pingala
 induces certain actions.
    (b) Certain other actions induce the flow of the breath through the left
 nostril (Ida), and conversely.
    (c) Yet a third class of actions induce the flow of the breath through
 both nostrils at once (Sushumna), and conversely.
    (d) The degree of mental and physical activity is interdependent with the
 distance from the nostrils at which the breath can be felt by the back of the
 hand.
    4. First practice. --- Let him concentrate his mind upon the act of
 breathing, saying mentally, "The breath flows in", "the breath flows out",
 and record the results.  [This practice may resolve itself into
 Mahasatipatthana (vide Liber XXV) or induce Samadhi.  Whichever occurs should
 be followed up as the right Ingenium of the Zelator, or the advice of his
 Practicus, may determine.]
    5. Second practice. Pranayama. --- This is outlined in Liber E.  Further,
 let the Zelator accomplished in those practices endeavour to master a cycle
 of 10, 20, 40 or even 16, 32, 64.  But let this be done gradually and with
 due caution.  And when he is steady and easy both in Asana and Pranayama, let
 him still further increase the period.
    Thus let him investigate these statements which follow: ---
    (a) If Pranayama be properly performed, the body will first of all become
 covered with sweat.  This sweat is different in character from that
 customarily induced by exertion.  If the Practitioner rub this sweat
 thoroughly into his body, he will greatly strengthen it.
    (b) The tendency to perspiration will stop as the practice is continued,
 and the body become automatically rigid.
    Describe this rigidity with minute accuracy.
    (c) The state of automatic rigidity will develop into a state
 characterised by violent spasmodic movements of which the Practitioner is
 unconscious, but of whose result he is aware.  This result is that the body
 hops gently from place to place.  After the first two or three occurrences of
 this experience, Asana is not lost.  The body appears (on another theory) to
 have lost its weight almost completely and to be moved by an unknown force.
    (d) As a development of this stage, the body rises into the air, and
 remains there for an appreciably long period, from a second to an hour or
 more.
    Let him further investigate any mental results which may occur.

--- ConfMail V4.00
 * Origin: Operation Do Do Bird - New York, New York, (718) 499-9277 (1:107/666

056/068 Sat 16 Sep 1989 18:12:00
From:   Aleister Crowley
To:     All
Subj:   Liber Ru, Part 2
Attr:   local 
Metaphysical------------------------------------
* Original: FROM.....Tony Iannotti (107/666)
* Original: TO.......Moe (107/666)
* Forwarded by.......OPUS 107/666

    6. Third Practice. --- In order both to economise his time and to develop
 his powers, let the Zelator practise the deep full breathing which his
 preliminary exercises will have taught him during his walks.  Let him repeat
 a sacred sentence (mantra) or let him count, in such a way that his footfall
 beats accurately with the rhythm thereof, as is done in dancing.  Then let
 him practise Pranayama, at first without the Kumbhakam, and paying no
 attention to the nostrils otherwise than to keep them clear. Let him begin
 by an indrawing of the breath for 4 paces, and a breathing out for 4 paces. 
 Let him increase this gradually to 6.6, 8.8, 12.12, 16.16 and 24.24, or more
 if he be able. Next let him practise in the proper proportion 4.8, 6.12,
 8.16, 12.24 and so on.  Then if he choose, let him recommence the series,
 adding a gradually increasing period of Kumbhakam.
    7. Fourth practice. --- Following on this third practice, let him quicken
 his mantra and his pace until the walk develops into a dance.  This may also
 be practised with the ordinary waltz step, using a mantra in three-time, such
 as epeljon, epeljon, Artemiv; or Iao, Iao Sabao; in such cases the practice
 may be combined with devotion to a particular deity: see Liber CLXXV.  For
 the dance as such it is better to use a mantra of a non-committal character,
 such as To einai, To Kalon, To 'Agadon, or the like.
    8. Fifth practice. --- Let him practice mental concentration during the
 dance, and investigate the following experiments:
    (a) The dance becomes independent of the will.
    (b) Similar phenomena to those described in 5 (a), (b), (c), (d), occur.
    9. A note concerning the depth and fullness of the breathing.  In all
 proper expiration the last possible portion of air should be expelled.  In
 this the muscles of the throat, chest, ribs, and abdomen must be fully
 employed, and aided by the pressing of the upper arms into the flanks, and of
 the head into the thorax.
    In all proper inspiration the last possible portion of air must be drawn
 into the lungs.
    In all proper holding of the breath, the body must remain absolutely
 still.
    Ten minutes of such practice is ample to induce profuse sweating in any
 place of a temperature of 17= C or over.
    The progress of the Zelator in acquiring a depth and fullness of breath
 should be tested by the respirometer.
    The exercises should be carefully graduated to avoid overstrain and
 possible damage to the lungs.
    This depth and fullness of breath should be kept as much as possible, even
 in the rapid exercises, with the exception of the sixth practice following.
    10. Sixth Practice. --- Let the Zelator breathe as shallowly and rapidly
 as possible.  He should assume the attitude of his moment of greatest
 expiration, and breathe only with the muscles of his throat.  He may also
 practice lengthening the period between each shallow breathing.
    (This may be combined, when acquired, with concentration on the Visuddhi
 cakkra, i.e. let him fix his mind unwaveringly upon a point in the spine
 opposite the larynx.)

--- ConfMail V4.00
 * Origin: Operation Do Do Bird - New York, New York, (718) 499-9277 (1:107/666

057/068 Sat 16 Sep 1989 18:12:00
From:   Aleister Crowley
To:     All
Subj:   Liber Ru, Part 3
Attr:   local 
Metaphysical------------------------------------
* Original: FROM.....Tony Iannotti (107/666)
* Original: TO.......Curley (107/666)
* Forwarded by.......OPUS 107/666

    11. Seventh practice. --- Let the Zelator practise restraint of breathing
 in the following manner.  At any stage of breathing let him suddenly hold the
 breath, enduring the need to breathe until it passes, returns, and passes
 again, and so on until consciousness is lost, either rising to Samadhi or
 similar supernormal condition, or falling into oblivion.
    13. Ninth practice. -- Let him practice the usual forms of Pranayama, but
 let Kumbhakam be used after instead of before expiration.  Let him gradually
 increase the period of this Kumbhakam as in the case of the other.
    14. A note concerning the conditions of these experiments.
    The conditions favourable are dry, bracing air, a warm climate, absence of
 wind, absence of noise, insects and all other disturbing influences,{Note 1}
 a retired situation, simple food eaten in great moderation at the conclusion
 of the practices of morning and afternoon, and on no account before
 practising. Bodily health is almost essential, and should be most carefully
 guarded (See Liber CLXXXV, Task of a Neophyte).  A diligent and tractable
 disciple, or the Practicus of the Zelator, should aid him in his work.  Such
 a disciple should be noiseless, patient, vigilant, prompt, cheerful, of
 gentle manner and reverent to his master, intelligent to anticipate his
 wants, cleanly and gracious, not given to speech, devoted and unselfish. 
 With all this he should be fierce and terrible to strangers and all hostile
 influences, determined and vigorous, increasingly vigilant, the guardian of
 the threshold.
    It is not desirable that the Zelator should employ any other creature than
 a man, save in cases of necessity.  Yet for some of these purposes a dog will
 serve, for others a woman.  There are also others appointed to serve, but
 these are not for the Zelator.
    16. Eleventh practice. --- Let the Zelator at an time during the
 practices, especially during the periods of Kumbhakam, throw his will utterly
 towards his Holy Guardian Angel, directing his eyes inward and upward, and
 turning back his tongue as if to swallow it.
 
 ----------------
 1. Note that in the early stages of concentration of the mind, such
 annoyances become negligible.
 
 
                               -408-
 
 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
    (This latter operation is facilitated by severing the fraenum linguae,
 which, if done, should be done by a competent surgeon.  We do not advise this
 or any similar method of cheating difficulties.  This is, however, harmless.)
    In this manner the practice is to be raised from the physical to the
 spiritual-plane, even as the words Ruh, Ruach, Pneuma, Spiritus, Geist,
 Ghost, and indeed words of almost all languages, have been raised from their
 physical meanings of wind, breath, or movement, to the spiritual plane.  (RV
 is the old root meaning Yoni and hence Wheel (Fr. roue, Lat. rota, wheel) and
 the corresponding Semitic root means "to go".  Similarly spirit is connected
 with "spiral". -- Ed.)
    17. Let the Zelator attach no credit to any statements that may have been
 made throughout the course of this instruction, and reflect that even the
 counsel which we have given as suitable to the average case may be entirely
 unsuitable to his own.

--- ConfMail V4.00
 * Origin: Operation Do Do Bird - New York, New York, (718) 499-9277 (1:107/666
