The Holographic Universe - Michael Talbot - 1991

[Introduction]
"In the movie Star Wars, Luke Skywalker's adventure begins when a beam of light shoots out of the robot Artoo Detoo and projects a miniature three-dimensional image of Princess Leia. Luke watches spellbound as the ghostly sculpture of light begs for someone named Obi-wan Kenobi to come to her assistance.  The image is a hologram, a three dimensional picture made with the aid of a laser, and the technological magic required to make such images is remarkable.  But what is even more astounding is that some scientists are beginning to believe the universe itself is a kind of giant hologram, a splendidly detailed illusion no more or less real than the image of Princess Leia that starts Luke on his quest." 

"Indeed, it quickly became apparent to the ever growing number of scientists who came to embrace the holographic model that it helped explain virtually all paranormal and mystical experiences, and in the last half-dozen years or so it has continued to galvanize researchers and shed light on and increasing number of previously inexplicable phenomena. For example:

In 1985 Dr Stanislav Grof, chief of psychiatric research at the maryland Psychiatric Research Center and an assistant professor of psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, published a book in which  he concluded that existing neurophysiological models of the brain are inadequate and only a holographic model can explain such things as archetypal experiences, encounters with the collective unconscious, and other unusual phenomena experienced during altered states of consciousness."

[Consciousness and the Source of Reality: The PEAR Odyssey by Robert G. Jahn (Author), Brenda J. Dunne       (a book about how consciousness affects physical matter from princeton)]

http://www.statpac.org/walonick/reality.htm
A Holographic View of Reality 
© 1993, David S. Walonick, Ph.D.

"In the 1920's Wilder Penfield presented convincing evidence that memories were stored in specific locations in the brain. Penfield performed surgery on epileptic patients and found that when he stimulated the temporal lobes, the patients relived experiences from the past. He found that whenever he stimulated a specific region of the brain, it evoked the same memory. In his book The Mystery of the Mind (1975), Penfield described the patients experience as a "flashback", where the patient actually re-lived the experience. Penfield concluded that this meant that all experiences were stored in specific locations of the brain in memory engrams.

In an effort to verify Penfield's experiments, biologist Karl Lashley (1950) began searching for the elusive engrams. He had trained rats in maze-running abilities and then attempted to surgically remove the portion of the rat's brains that contained the maze-running knowledge. Lashley found that no matter what portion of the brain he removed, the rats retained their maze-running knowledge. Even when massive portions of the brain were removed, the rats were still able to navigate through the maze.

Karl Pribram (1969), a student of Penfield, was astonished by Lashley's research. Pribram noticed that when brain-injured patients had large sections of their brain removed, they did not suffer a loss of any specific memories. Instead, the patient's memory became increasingly hazy as greater portions of the brain were removed. Further research indicated that Penfield's experiments could be only duplicated on epileptic patients. Pribram (1977) came to the conclusion that memories are not localized in any specific brain cells, but rather, memory seemed to be distribution throughout the whole brain. The problem was that there was simply no known mechanism that would explain how this was possible.

Pribram remained puzzled until the mid 1960's, when he ran across an article in Scientific American describing the construction of laser hologram. He immediately synthesized the information and hypothesized that the mind itself was operating in a holographic manner.

Anatomist Paul Pietsch (1981) simply could not believe Pribram's theory, and he set out to disprove the holographic theory of the brain. After performing thousands of operations on salamanders, he became convinced that the mind perceives and stores information by encoding and decoding complex interference patterns.

A hologram is created by splitting a laser beam into two separate beams. One beam is bounced off an object, and the other serves as a reference beam. An interference pattern is created that bears little resemblance to the object, however, it contains all the information necessary to recreate the image of the object. The most remarkable feature to Pribram was the idea that a photographic plate containing a laser image could be broken in two, and each half would contain the complete image of the object, but with less resolution. This was identical to the way that memory in the brain seemed to be operating. Regardless of how many times the photographic plate was broken, each piece contained the information necessary to reconstruct the entire image.

Pribram hypothesized that the neurons, axions, and dendrites of the brain create wave-like patterns that cause an interference pattern. In 1966 he published his findings and during the next few years he refined his theory. According to Pribram, a holographic theory explains many of the mysteries of the brain, including the enormous capacity of the brain for the storage and retrieval of information.

By the 1970's several other researchers had expanded Pribram's theory. British physicist Pieter van Heerden (1970) proposed that our ability to recognize familiar objects is similar to recognition holography. A similar technique known as interference holography could explain our ability to perceive differences in a object that has changed. Harvard researchers Daniel Pollen and Michael Tractenberg (1972) studied individuals with eidetic (photographic) memories and proposed the idea that memory is related to an individual's ability to create holographic images in the brain. People with outstanding memories are better able to access larger portions of their brains.

One distinguishing characteristic of a hologram is the ability to create a virtual image. A virtual image is a three-dimensional extension in space that appears to exist, yet contains no substance. We generally believe that we are able to clearly distinguish between external and internal events, however, considerable research has shown that the division is not as well-defined as we perceive. The "world-out-there" and the "world-in-here" are not always clearly delineated"



Holographic Universe 
p21-22
	"Holography also explains how our brains can store so many memories in so little space.  The brilliant Hungarian-born physicist and mathematician John von Neumann once calculated that over the course of the average human lifetime, the brain stores something on the order of 2.8 x 1020 (280,000,000,000,000,000,000) bits of information, and brain researchers have long sturggled to come up with a mechanism that explains sucha  vast capability.
	Interestingly, holograms also possess a fantastic capacity for information storage.  By changing the angle at which the two lasers strike a piece of photographic film, it is possible to record many different images on the same surface.  Any image thus recorded can be retrieved simply by illuminating the film with a laser veam possessing the same angle as the original two beams.  By employing this method researchers have calculated that a one-inch-square of film can store the same amount of information contained in 50 bibles!
...
	The holographic idea offers a further analogy for the associative tendencies of memory.  This is illustrated by yet another kind of holographic recording technique.  First, the light of a single laser beam is bounced off two objects simultaneously, say an easy chair and a smoking pipe.  The light bounced off each object is then allowed to collide, and the resulting interference pattern is captured on film.  Then whenever the easy chair is illuminated with laser light and the light that reflects off the easy chair is passed through the film, a three dimensional image of the pipe will appear.  Conversely, whenever the same is done iwth the pipe, a hologram of the easy chair appears.  So, if our brains function holographically, a similar process may be responsible for the way certain objects evoke specific memories from our past."

p25
	"Pribram points out that when we look at a person, the image of the person is really on the surface of our retinas.  Yet we do not perceive the person as being on our retinas.  We perceive them as being in the "world-out-there".  SImilarly, when we stub our toe we experience the pain in our toe.  But the pain is not really in our toe.  It is actually a neurophysiological process taking place somewhere in our brain.  How then is our brain able to take the multitude of neurophysiological processes that manifest as our experience, all of which are internal, and fool us into thinking that some are internal and some are located beyond the confines of our gray matter?  Creating the illusion that things are located where they are not is the quintessential feature of a hologram."

p27-28
	"While the theories that enabled the development of the hologram were first formulated in 1947 by Dennis Gabor (who later won a nobel prize for his efforts), in the late 1960s and early 1970s Pribram's theory received even more persuasive experimental support.  When Gabor first conceived the idea of holography he wasn't thinking about lasers.  His goal was to improve the electron microscope, then a primitive and imperfect device.  His approach was a mathematical one, and the mathematics he used was a type of calculus invented by an eighteenth century Frenchman named Jean B.J. Fourier.
	Roughly speaking what Fourier developed was a mathematica way of converting any pattern, no matter how complex, into a language of simple waves.  He also showed how these wave forms could be converted back into the original pattern, no matter how complex, into a language of simple waves.  He also showed how these wave forms could be converted back into the original pattern.  In other words, just as a television camera converts an image into electromagnetic frequencies and a television set converts those frequencies back into the original image, Fourier showed how a similar process could be achieved mathematically.  The equations he developed to convert images into wave forms and then back again are known as Fourier transforms.
	Fourier transforms enabled Gabor to convert a picture of an object into the blur of interference patterns on a piece of holographic film.  They also enabled him to devise a way of converting those interference patterns back into an image of the original object.  In face the special whole in every part of a hologram is one of the by-products that occurs when an image or pattern is translated into the Fourier language of wave forms.
...
	But it wasn't until 1979 that Berkeley neurophysiologists Russel and Karen Devalois made the discovery that settled the matter.  Research in the 1960s had shown that each brain cell in the visual cortex is geared to respond to a different pattern--some brain cells fire when they see a horizontal line, others fire when the eyes see a vertical line, and so on.  As a result, many researchers concluded that the brain takes input from these highly specialized cells called feature detectors, and somehow fits them together to provide us with our visual perceptions of the world.
	Despite the popularity of this view, the DeValoises felt it was only a partial truth.  To test their assumption they used Fourier's equations to convert plaid and checkerboard patterns into simple wave forms.  Then they tested to see how the brain cells in the visual cortex responded to these new wave-form images.  What they found was that the brain cells responded no to the original patterns, but to the Fourier translations of the patterns.  Only one conclusion could be drawn.  The brain was using Fourier mathematics-the same mathematics holography employed-to convert visual images into the fourier language of wave forms."

"despite such evidence, Pribram's holographic model remains etremely controversial"

p33-35
	"One startling discovery made by quantum physicists was that if you break matter into smaller and smaller pieces eventually you reach a point where those pieces--electrons, protons and so on--no longer posses the traits of objects.  For example, most of us tend to think of an electron as a tiny sphere or a BB whizzing around, but nothing could be further from the truth.  Although an electron can sometimes behave as if it were a compact little particle, physicists have found that it literally possesses no dimension.  This is difficult for most of us to imagine because everything at our own level of existence possesses dimension.  And yet if you try to measure the width of an electron, you will discover it's an impossible task.  An electron is simply not an object as we know it.
	Another discovery physicists made is that an electron can manifest as either a particle or a wave."
...
	"This chameleonlike ability is common to all subatomic particles.  It is also common to all things once thought to manifest exclusively as waves.  Light, gamma rays, radio waves, xrays--all can change from waves to particles and back again.  Today physicists believe that subatomic phenomena should not be classified solely as either waves or particles, but as a single category of somethings that are always somehow both.  These somethings are called quanta, and physicists believe they are the basic stuff from which the entire universe is made.
	Perhaps most astonishing of all is that there is compelling evidence that the only time quanta manifest as particles is when we are looking at them.  For instance, when an electron isn't being looked at, experimental findings suggest that it is always a wave.  Physicists are able to draw this conclusion because they have devised clever strategies for deducing how an electron behaves when it is not being observed.
...
http://www.statpac.org/walonick/reality.htm
"Quantum physics has presented us with a puzzling picture of the nature of reality. Physicists have demonstrated that quanta can manifest themselves as either particles or waves. When scientists are not looking at electrons, they always exist as a wave, and whenever they design an experiment to observe the elections, they always appear as particles. Danish physicist Niels Bohr pointed out that it is meaningless to talk about the properties and characteristics of a particle that is not being observed. Einstein did not accept Bohr's argument. He believed that Bohr had to be wrong because the implications of quantum theory were simply too astounding (Talbot, 1991, p.35-38).

At the heart of the controversy was the idea of instantaneous communication between particles. When two complimentary particles were allowed to travel apart, their polarizations could be simultaneously measured. Quantum theory predicted that regardless of the distance between the particles, their polarizations would always be the same. The act of measuring one would force the polarization of the other. Einstein (1935) interpreted this to mean that quantum theory was incorrect because nothing could travel faster than the speed of light. Bohr argued that Einstein was incorrect in thinking of the particles as separate. He maintained that they were part of an indivisible system. Quantum theory proved to be incredible successful and became the accepted theory even though the technology did not exist to actually perform the experiment.

Princeton physicist David Bohm became a believer in holographic systems during his study of plasma systems. He found that when a gas became a plasma, the individual electrons began behaving as a unified whole. The electrons became engaged in a process of self-organization. Bohm became disillusioned with quantum theory because it attempted to isolate cause-and-effect relationships from the universe as a whole. He maintained that only a holistic view would explain the electron co-ordination in high energy plasma systems. Furthermore, Bohm argued that space itself was an illusion, and that it was meaningless to discuss the separateness of things at the quantum level. Physicists began describing the quantum potential in terms of nonlocal connections.

p41-43
	"At the level of our every day lives things have very specific locations, but Bohm's interpretation of quantum physics indicated that at the subquantum level, the level in which the quantum potential operated, location ceased to exist.  All points in space became equal to all other points in space, and it was meaningless to speak of anything as being separate from anything else.  Physicists call this property "nonlocality".
	The nonlocal aspect of the quantum potential enabled Bohm to explain the connection between twin particles without violating special relativity's ban against anything traveling faster than the speed of light.
…
	Indeed, because the quantum potential permeates all of space, all particles are nonlocally interconnected.  More and more the picture of reality Bohm was developing was not one in which subatomic particles were separate from one another and moving through the void of space, but one in which all things were part of an unbroken web and embedded in a space that was as real and rich with process as the matter that moved through it.
..
	By late 1950 Bohm had become a research fellow at Bristol University, England.  There along with a young research student named Yakir Aharonov, he discovered another important example of nonlocal interconnectedness.  Bohm and Aharonov found that under the right circumstances an electron is able to "feel" the presence of a magnetic field that is in a region where there is zero probability of finding the electron.  This phenomenon is now known as the Aharonov-Bohm effect."

46-50
"Enfolded Orders and Unfolded Realities
	One of Bohm's most startling assertions is that the tangible reality of our everyday lives is really a kind of illusion, like a holographic image. Underlying it is a deeper order of existence, a vast and more primary level of reality that gives birth to all the objects and appearances of our physical world in much the same way that a piece of holographic film gives birth to a hologram. Bohm calls this deeper level of reality the implicate (which means "enfolded") order, and he refers to our own level of existence as the explicate, or unfolded, order.
	He uses these terms because he sees the manifestation of all forms in the universe as the result of countless enfoldings and unfoldings Between these two orders. For example, Bohm believes an electron is not one thing but a totality or ensemble enfolded throughout the whole of space. When an instrument detects the presence of a single electron it is simply because one aspect of the electron's ensemble has un- folded, similar to the way an ink drop unfolds out of the glycerine, at that particular location. When an electron appears to be moving it is due to a continuous series of such unfoldments and enfoldments.
put another way, electrons and all other particles are no more sub- stantive or permanent than the form a geyser of water takes as it gushes out of a fountain. They are sustained by a constant influx from the implicate order, and when a particle appears to be destroyed, it is not lost. It has merely enfolded back into the deeper order from which it sprang. A piece of holographic film and the image it generates are also an example of an implicate and explicate order. The film is an implicate order because the image encoded in its interference patterns is a hidden totality enfolded throughout the whole. The hologram projected from the film is an explicate order because it represents the unfolded and perceptible version of the image.
	The constant and flowing exchange between the two orders explains how particles, such as the electron in the positronium atom, can shape- shift from one kind of particle to another. Such shiftings can be viewed as one particle, say an electron, enfolding back into the implicate order while another, a photon, unfolds and takes its place. It also explains how a quantum can manifest as either a particle or a wave. According to Bohm, both aspects are always enfolded in a quantum's ensemble, but the way an observer interacts with the ensemble determines which aspect unfolds and which remains hidden. As such, the role an ob- server plays in determining the form a quantum takes may be no more mysterious than the fact that the way a jeweler manipulates a gem determines which of its facets become visible and which do not. Be- cause the term hologram usually refers to an image that is static and does not convey the dynamic and ever active nature of the incalculable enfoldings and unfoldings that moment by moment create our uni- verse, Bohm prefers to describe the universe not as a hologram, but as a "holomovement."
	The existence of a deeper and holographically organized order also explains why reality becomes nonlocal at the subquantum level. As we have seen, when something is organized holographically, all sem-blance of location breaks down. Saying that every part of a piece of holographic film contains all the information possessed by the whole is really just another way of saying that the information is dis- tributed nonlocally. Hence, if the universe is organized according to holographic principles, it, too, would be expected to have nonlocal properties.
The Undivided Wholeness of All Things
	Most mind-boggling of all are Bohm's fully developed ideas about wholeness. Because everything in the cosmos is made out of the seam- less holographic fabric of the implicate order, he believes it is as meaningless to view the universe as composed of "parts," as it is to view the different geysers in a fountain as separate from the water out of which they flow. An electron is not an "elementary particle. " It is just a name given to a certain aspect of the holomovement. Dividing reality up into parts and then naming those parts is always arbitrary, a product of convention, because subatomic particles, and everything else in the universe, are no more separate from one another than different patterns in an ornate carpet. This is a profound suggestion. In his general theory of relativity Einstein astounded the world when he said that space and time are not separate entities, but are smoothly linked and part of a larger whole he called the space-time continuum. Bohm takes this idea a giant step further. He says that everything in the universe is part of a con- tinuum. Despite the apparent separateness of things at the explicate level, everything is a seamless extension of everything else, and ulti- mately even the implicate and explicate orders blend into each other.
…
Consciousness as a More Subtle Form of Matter
	In addition to explaining why quantum physicists find so many exam- ples of interconnectedness when they plumb the depths of matter, Bohm's holographic universe explains many other puzzles. One is the effect consciousness seems to have on the subatomic world. As we have seen, Bohm rejects the idea that particles don't exist until they are observed. But he is not in principle against trying to bring con- sciousness and physics together. He simply feels that most physicists go about it the wrong way, by once again trying to fragment reality and saying that one separate thing, consciousness, interacts with an- other separate thing, a subatomic particle.
	Because all such things are aspects of the holomovement,he feels it has no meaning to speak of consciousness and matter as interacting. In a sense, the observer is the observed. The observer is also the measuring device, the experimental results, the laboratory, and the breeze that blows outside the laboratory. In fact, Bohm believes that consciousness is a more subtle form of matter, and the basis for any relationship between the two lies not in our own level of reality, but deep in the implicate order. Consciousness is present in various de- grees of enfoldment and unfoldment in all matter, which is perhaps why plasmas possess some of the traits of living things. As Bohm puts it, "The ability of form to be active is the most characteristic feature of mind, and we have something that is mindlike already with the electron."11
	Similarly, he believes that dividing the universe up into living and nonliving things also has no meaning. Animate and inanimate matter are inseparably interwoven, and life, too, is enfolded throughout the totality of the universe. Even a rock is in some way alive, says Bohm, for life and intelligence are present not only in all of matter, but in "energy," "space," "time, " "the fabric of the entire universe," and everything else we abstract out of the holomovement and mistakenly view as separate things.
The idea that consciousness and life (and indeed all things) are ensembles enfolded throughout the universe has an equally dazzling flipside. Just as every portion of a hologram contains the image of the whole, every portion of the universe enfolds the whole. This means that if we knew how to access it we could find the Andromeda galaxy in the thumbnail of our left hand."

51
"According to our current understanding of physics, every region of space is awash with different kinds of fields composed of waves of vary lengths.  Each wav always has at least some energy.  When physicists calculate the minimum amount of energy a wave can posses, they find that every cubic centimeter of empty space contains more energy than the total energy of all he matter in the known universe" (source?)

52-53
	"Then in 1982 physicists Alain Aspect, Jean Dalibard and Gerard Roger of the Institute of Optics at the University of Paris succeeded. First they produced a series of twin photons by heating calcium atoms with lasers. Then they allowed each photon to travel in opposite directions through 6.5 meters of pipe and pass through special filters that di- rected them toward one of two possible polarization analyzers. It took each filter 10 billionths of a second to switch between one analyzer or the other, about 30 billionths of a second less than it took for light to travel the entire 13meters separating each set of photons. In this way Aspect and his colleagues were able to rule out any possibility of the photons communicating through any known physical process.
	Aspect and his team discovered that, as quantum theory predicted, each photon was still able to correlate its angle of polarization with that of its twin. This meant that either Einstein's ban against faster- than-light communication was being violated, or the two photons were nonlocally connected. ""


54-55
Pribram and Bohm Together
Considered together, Bohm and Pribram's theories provide a profound new way of looking at the world: Our brains mathematically con- struct objective reality by interpreting frequencies that are ulti- mately projections from another dimension, a deeper order of exis- tence that is beyond both space and time: The brain is a hologram enfolded in a holographic universe.
For Pribram, this synthesis made him realize that the objective world does not exist, at least not in the way we are accustomed to believing. What is "out there" is a vast ocean of waves and frequen- cies, and reality looks concrete to us only because our brains are able to take this holographic blur and convert it into the sticks and stones and other familiar objects that make up our world. How is the brain (which itself is composed of frequencies of matter) able to take something as insubstantial as a blur of frequencies and make it seem solid to the touch? "The kind of mathematical process that Bekesy simulated with his vibrators is basic to how our brains construct our image of a world out there," Pribram states.17 In other words, the smoothness of a piece of fine china and the feel of beach sand be- neath our feet are really just elaborate versions of the phantom limb syndrome.
According to Pribram this does not mean there aren't china cups and grains of beach sand out there. It simply means that a china cup has two very different aspects to its reality. When it is filtered through the lens of our brain it manifests as a cup. But if we could get rid of our lenses, we'd experience it as an interference pattern. Which one is real and which is illusion? "Both are real to me, " says Pribram, "or, if you want to say, neither of them are real."18
This state of affairs is not limited to china cups. We, too, have two very different aspects to our reality. We can view ourselves as physical bodies moving through space. Or we can view ourselves as a blur of interference patterns enfolded throughout the cosmic hologram. Bohm believes this second point of view might even be the more correct, for to think of ourselves as a holographic mind/brain looking at a holographic universe is again an abstraction, an attempt to sepa- rate two things that ultimately cannot be separated.19"


59-60
The holographic idea also sheds light on the unexplainable linkages that can sometimes occur between the consciousnesses of two or more individuals. One of the most famous examples of such linkage is em-
bodied in Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung's concept of a collective uncon- scious. Early in his career Jung became convinced that the dreams, artwork, fantasies, and hallucinations of his patients often contained symbols and ideas that could not be explained entirely as products of their personal history. Instead, such symbols more closely resembled the images and themes of the world's great mythologies and religions. Jung concluded that myths, dreams, hallucinations, and religious vi- sions all spring from the same source, a collective unconscious that is shared by all people.
One experience that led Jung to this conclusion took place in 1906 and involved the hallucination of a young man suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. One day while making his rounds Jung found the young man standing at a window and staring up at the sun. The man was also moving his head from side to side in a curious manner. When Jung asked him what he was doing he explained that he was looking at the sun's penis, and when he moved his head from side to side, the sun's penis moved and caused the wind to blow.
At the time Jung viewed the man's assertion as the product of a hallucination. But several years later he came across a translation of a two-thousand-year-old Persian religious text that changed his mind. The text consisted of a series of rituals and invocations designed to bring on visions. It described one of the visions and said that if the participant looked at the sun he would see a tube hanging down from it, and when the tube moved from side to side it would cause the wind to blow. Since circumstances made it extremely unlikely that the man had had contact with the text containing the ritual, Jung concluded that the man's vision was not simply a product of his unconscious mind, but had bubbled up from a deeper level, from the collective unconscious of the human race itself. Jung called such images arche- types and believed they were so ancient it's as if each of us has the memory of a two-million-year-old man lurking somewhere in the depths of our unconscious minds.

65-66
	At the 1987 annual meeting of the Association for the Study of Dreams held in W ashington, D. C., physicist Fred Alan Wolf delivered a talk in which he asserted that the holographic model may help ex- plain this unusual phenomenon. Wolf, an occasional lucid dreamer himself, points out that a piece of holographic film actually generates two images, a virtual image that appears to be in the space behind the film, and a real image that comes into focus in the space in front of the film. One difference between the two is that the light waves that compose a virtual image seem to be diverging from an apparent focus or source. As we have seen, this is an illusion, for the virtual image of a hologram has no more extension in space than does the image in a mirror. But the real image of a hologram is formed by light waves that are coming to a focus, and this is not an illusion. The real image does possess extension in space. Unfortunately, little attention is paid to this real image in the usual applications of holography because an image that comes into focus in empty air is invisible and can only be seen when dust particles pass through it, or when someone blows a puff of smoke through it
	Wolf believes that all dreams are internal holograms, and ordinary dreams are less vivid because they are virtual images. However, he thinks the brain also has the ability to generate real images, and that is exactly what it does when we are dreaming lucidly. The unusual vibrancy of the lucid dream is due to the fact that the waves are converging and not diverging. "If there is a Viewer' where these waves focus, that viewer will be bathed in the scene, and the scene coming to a focus will 'contain' him. In this way the dream experience will appear 'lucid,' " observes Wolf.9
	Like Pribram, Wolf believes our minds create the illusion of reality "out there" through the same kind of processes studied by Bekesy. He believes these processes are also what allows the lucid dreamer to create subjective realities in which things like marble floors and flow- ers are as tangible and real as their so-called objective counterparts. In fact, he thinks our ability to be lucid in our dreams suggests that there may not be much difference between the world at large and the world inside our heads. "When the observer and the observed can separate and say this is the observed and this is the observer, which is an effect one seems to be having when lucid, then I think it's ques- tionable whether [lucid dreams] should be considered subjective," says Wolf.10
Wolf postulates that lucid dreams (and perhaps all dreams) are actually visits to parallel universes. They are just smaller holograms within the larger and more inclusive cosmic hologram. He even sug- gests that the ability to lucid-dream might better be called parallel universe awareness. "I call it parallel universe awareness because I believe that parallel universes arise as other images in the hologram, " Wolf states.11 

67-70
	Grof first became interested in nonordinary states of consciousness in the 1950s while investigating the clinical uses of the hallucinogen LSD at the Psychiatric Research Institute in his native Prague, Czech- oslovakia. The purpose of his research was to determine whether LSD had any therapeutic applications. When Grof began his research, most scientists viewed the LSD experience as little more than a stress reaction, the brain's way of responding to a noxious chemical. But when Grof studied the records of his patient's experiences he did not find evidence of any recurring stress reaction. Instead, there was a definite continuity running through each of the patient's sessions. "Rather than being unrelated and random, the experiential content seemed to represent a successive unfolding of deeper and deeper lev- els of the unconscious," says Grof.12 This suggested that repeated LSD sessions had important ramifications for the practice and theory of psychotherapy, and providedGrof and his colleagues with the impe- tus they needed to continue the research. 
….
	Most disconcerting of all were those experiences in which the pa- tient's consciousness appeared to expand beyond the usual boundaries of the ego and explore what it was like to be other living things and even other objects. For example, Grof had one female patient who suddenly became convinced she had assumed the identity of a female prehistoric reptile. She not only gave a richly detailed description of what it felt like to be encapsuled in such a form, but noted that the portion of the male of the species' anatomy she found most sexually arousing was a patch of colored scales on the side of its head. Al- though the woman had no prior knowledge of such things, a conversa- tion Grof had with a zoologist later confirmed that in certain species of reptiles, colored areas on the head do indeed play an important role as triggers of sexual arousal.
	Patients were also able to tap into the consciousness of their rela- tives and ancestors. One woman experienced what it was like to be her mother at the age of three and accurately described a frightening event that had befallen her mother at the time. The woman also gave a precise description of the house her mother had lived in as well as the white pinafore she had been wearing—all details her mother later confirmed and admitted she had never talked about before. Other patients gave equally accurate descriptions of events that had befallen ancestors who had lived decades and even centuries before.
Other experiences included the accessing of racial and collective memories. Individuals of Slavic origin experienced what it was like to participate in the conquests of Genghis Khan's Mongolian hordes, to dance in trance with the Kalahari bushmen, to undergo the initiation rites of the Australian aborigines, and to die as sacrificial victimsof the Aztecs. And again the descriptions frequently contained obscure historical facts and a degree of knowledgethat was often completely at odds with the patient's education,race, and previous exposure to the subject. For instance, one uneducated patient gave a richly detailed account of the techniques involved in the Egyptian practice of embalm- ing and mummification, including the form and meaning of various amulets and sepulchral boxes, a list of the materials used in the fixing of the mummy cloth, the size and shape of the mummy bandages, and other esoteric facets of Egyptian funeral services. Other individuals tuned into the cultures of the Far East and not only gave impressive descriptions of what it was like to have a Japanese, Chinese, or Ti- betan psyche, but also related various Taoist or Buddhist teachings.
	In fact, there did not seem to be any limit to what Grof's LSD subjects could tap into. They seemed capable of knowing what it was like to be every animal, and even plant, on the tree of evolution. They could experience what it was like to be a blood cell, an atom, a thermonuclear process inside the sun, the consciousness of the entire planet, and even the consciousness of the entire cosmos. More than that, they displayed the ability to transcend space and time, and occa- sionally they related uncannily accurate precognitive information. In an even stranger vein they sometimes encountered nonhuman intelli- gences during their cerebral travels, discarnate beings, spirit guides from "higher planes of consciousness, " and other suprahuman entities."
	On occasion subjects also traveled to what appeared to be other universes and other levels of reality. In one particularly unnerving session a young man suffering from depression found himself in what seemed to be another dimension. It had an eerie luminescence, and although he could not see anyone he sensed that it was crowded with discarnate beings. Suddenly he sensed a presence very close to him, and to his surprise it began to communicate with him telepathically. It asked him to please contact a couple who lived in the Moravian city of Kromerizand let them know that their son Ladislavwas well taken care of and doing all right. It then gave him the couple's name, street address, and telephonenumber.
	The information meant nothing to either Grof or the young man and seemed totally unrelated to the young man's problems and treatment. Still, Grof could not put it out of his mind. "After some hesitation and with mixed feelings, I finally decided to do what certainly would have made me the target of my colleagues' jokes, had they found out," says Grof. "I went to the telephone, dialed the number in Kromeriz, and asked if I could speak with Ladislav. To my astonishment, the woman on the other side of the line started to cry. When she calmed down, she told me with a broken voice: 'Our son is not with us any more; he passed away, we lost him three weeks ago.' "
…
After personally guiding over three thousand LSD sessions (each lasting at least five hours) and studying the records of more than two thousand sessions conducted by colleagues, Grof became unalterably convinced that something extraordinary was going on. "After years of conceptual struggle and confusion, I have concluded that the data from LSD research indicate an urgent need for a drastic revision of the existing paradigms for psychology, psychiatry, medicine, and pos- sibly science in general," he states. "There is at present little doubt in my mind that our current understanding of the universe, of the nature of reality, and particularly of human beings, is superficial, incorrect, and incomplete."
[Stanislov Grof:  "Realms of the Human Unconciousness" ; "The Adventure of Self Discovery" ; "beyond the brain"]

83-85
How is it that an image formed in the mind can have an effect on something as formidable as an incurable cancer? Not surprisingly the holographic theory of the brain can be used to explain this phenomenon as well. Psychologist Jeanne Achterberg, director of research and rehabilitation science at the Universityof Texas Health Science Center in Dallas, Texas, and one of the scientists who helped develop the imagery techniques Simonton uses, believes it is the holographic imaging capabilities of the brain that provide the key.
…
Achterberg found that the physiological effects produced through the use of imagery are not only powerful, but can also be extremely specific. For example, the term white blood cell actually refers to a number of different kinds of cell. In one study, Achterberg decided to see if she could train individuals to increase the number of only one particular type of white blood cell in their body. To do this she taught one group of college students how to image a cell known as a neutro- phil, the major constituent of the white blood cell population. She trained a second group to image T-cells, a more specialized kind of white blood cell. At the end of the study the group that learned the
neutrophil imagery had a significant increase in the number of neutro- phils in their body, but no change in the number of T-cells. The group that learned to image T-cells had a significant increase in the number of that kind of cell, but the number of neutrophils in their body re- mained the same.5
Achterberg says that belief is also critical to a person's health. As she points out, virtually everyone who has had contact with the medi- cal world knows at least one story of a patient who was sent home to die, but because they "believed" otherwise, they astounded their doc- tors by completely recovering. In her fascinating book Imagery in Healing she describes several of her own encounters with such cases. In one, a woman was comatose on admission, paralyzed, and diag- nosed with a massive brain tumor. She underwent surgery to "debulk" her tumor (remove as much as is safely possible), but because she was considered close to death, she was sent home without receiving either radiation or chemotherapy.
Instead of promptly dying, the woman became stronger by the day. As her biofeedback therapist, Achterberg was able to monitor the woman's progress, and by the end of sixteen months the woman showed no evidence of cancer. Why? Although the woman was intelli- gent in a worldly sense, she was only moderately educated and did not really know the meaning of the word tumor—or the death sentence it imparted. Hence, she did not believe she was going to die and overcame her cancer with the same confidence and determination she'd used to overcome every other illness in her life, says Achterberg. When Achterberg saw her last, the woman no longer had any traces of paralysis, had thrown away her leg braces and her cane, and had even been out dancing a couple of times.6

87-88
	In a recent experiment, psychologist Shlomo Breznitz at Hebrew University, Jerusalem, had several groups of Israeli soldiers march forty kilometers (about twenty-five miles), but gave each group different information.  He had some groups march thirty kilometers, and then told them they had another ten to go.  H told others they were going to march sixty kilometers, but in reality only marched them forty.  He allowed some to see distance markers, and provided no clues to others as to how far they had walked.  At the end of the study Breznitz found that the stress hormone levels in the soldiers blood always reflected their estimates and not the actual distance they had marched.  In other words their bodies responded not to reality, but to what they were imagining as reality.
	According to Dr. Charles A Garfield, a former National Aeronautics and Space administration (NASA) researcher and current president of the Performance Sciences Institute in Berkeley, California, the Soviets have extensively researched the relationship between imagery and physical performance.  In one study of a phalanx of world-class Soviet athletes was divided into four groups.  The firs group spent 100 percent of their training time in training.  The second spent 75 percent of their time training and 25 percent of their time visualizing the exact movements and accomplishments they wanted to achieve in their sport.  The third spent 50 percent of their time training and 50 percent visualizing, and the fourth spend 25 percent training and 75 percent visualizing.  Unbelievable, at the 1980 Winter Games in Lake Placid, New York, the fourth group showed the greatest improvement in performance, followed by groupes three two and one in that order.


90-92
[quote this] "In a holographic universe we are also connected to our bodies, and in the preceding pages we have seen some of the ways these connections manifest themselves. But there are others, perhaps even an infinity of others. As Pribram states, "If indeed every part of our body is a reflection of the whole, then there must be all kinds of mechanisms to control what's going on. Nothing is firm at this point. "17 Given our ignorance in the matter, instead of asking how the mind controls the body holographic,perhaps a more important question is, What is the extent of this control? Are there any limitations on it, and if so, what are they? That is the question to which we now turn our attention."

The effectiveness of a placebo in any given circumstance also varies greatly. In nine double-blind studies comparing placebos to aspirin, placebos proved to be 54 percent as effective as the actual analgesic.20 Prom this one might expect that placebos would be even less effective when compared to a much stronger painkiller such as morphine, but this is not the case. In six double-blind studies placebos were found to be 56 percent as effective as morphine in relieving pain!21
Why? One factor that can affect the effectiveness of a placebo is the method in which it is given. Injections are generally perceived as more potent than pills, and hence giving a placebo in an injection can enhance its effectiveness. Similarly, capsules are often seen as more effective than tablets, and even the size, shape, and color of a pill can play a role. In a study designed to determine the suggestive value of a pill's color, researchers found that people tend to view yellow or orange pills as mood manipulators, either stimulants or depressants. Dark red pills are assumed to be sedatives; lavender pills, hallucinogens; and white pills, painkillers.22
Another factor is the attitude the doctor conveys when he prescribes the placebo. Dr. David Sobel, a placebo specialist at Kaiser Hospital, California, relates the story of a doctor treating an asthma patient who was having an unusually difficult time keeping his bronchial tubes open. The doctor ordered a sample of a potent new medicine from a pharmaceutical company and gave it to the man. Within minutes the man showed spectacular improvement and breathed more easily. How- ever, the next time he had an attack, the doctor decided to see what would happen if he gave the man a placebo. This time the man com- plained that there must be something wrong with the prescription because it didn't completely eliminate his breathing difficulty. This convinced the doctor that the sample drug was indeed a potent new asthma medication—until he received a letter from the pharmaceutical company informing him that instead of the new drug, they had acci- dentally sent him a placebo! Apparently it was the doctor's unwitting enthusiasm for the first placebo, and not the second, that accounted for the discrepancy.23

96-97
	Such events are not limited to experimental situations. Placebos also play a role in our everyday lives. Does caffeine keep you awake at night? Research has shown that even an injection of caffeine won't keep caffeine-sensitive individuals awake if they believe they are receiving a sedative.33 Has an antibiotic ever helped you get over a cold or sore throat? If so, you were experiencing the placebo effect. All colds are caused by viruses, as are several types of sore throat, and antibiotics are only effective against bacterial infections, not viral infections. Have you ever experienced an unpleasant side effect after taking a medication? In a study of a tranquilizer called mephenesin, researchers found that 10 to 20 percent of the test subjects experienced negative side effects—including nausea, itchy rash, and heart palpitations—regardless of whether they were given the actual drug or a placebo.*34 Similarly, in a recent study of a new kind of chemo- therapy, 30 percent of the individuals in the control group, the group given placebos, lost their hair.35 So if you know someone who is taking chemotherapy, tell them to try to be optimistic in their expectations. The mind is a powerful thing.
	In addition to offering us a glimpse of this power, placebos also support a more holographic approach to understanding the mind/body relationship. As health and nutrition columnistJane Brody observes in an article in the New York Times, "The effectiveness of placebos provides dramatic support for a 'holistic' view of the human organism, a view that is receiving increasing attention in medical research. This view holds that the mind and body continually interact and are too closely interwoven to be treated as independent entities. "36
	The placebo effect may also be affecting us in far vaster ways than we realize, as is evidenced by a recent and extremely puzzling medical mystery. If you have watched any television at all in the last year or so, you have no doubt seen a blitzkrieg of commercials promoting aspirin's ability to decrease the risk of heart attack. There is a good deal of convincing evidence to back this up, otherwise television cen- sors, who are real sticklers for accuracy when it comes to medical claims in commercials, wouldn't allow such copy on the air. This is all well and good. The only problem is that aspirin doesn't seem to have the same effect on people in England. A six-year study of 5, 139 British doctors revealed no evidence that aspirin reduces the risk of heart attack/17 Is there a flaw in somebody's research, or is it possible that some kind of massive placebo effect is to blame? Whatever the case, don't stop believing in the prophylactic benefits of aspirin. It still may save your life.

102-105
	In studies conducted at the Menninger Foundation, the University of California's Langley Porter Neuropsychiatric Institute, and others, Schwarz astonished doctors by sticking mammoth six-inch sailmaker's needles completely through his arms without bleeding, without flinch- ing, and without producing beta brain waves (the type of brain waves normally produced when a person is in pain). Even when the needles were removed, Schwarz still did not bleed, and the puncture holes closed tightly. In addition, Schwarz altered his brain-wave rhythms at will, held burning cigarettes against his flesh without harming him- self, and even carried live coals around in his hands. He claims he acquired these abilities when he was in a Nazi concentration camp and had to learn how to control pain in order to withstand the terrible beatings he endured. He believes anyone can learn voluntary control of their body and thus gain responsibility for his or her own health.56
	Oddly enough, in 1947 another Dutchman demonstrated similar abilities. The man's name was Mirin Dajo, and in public performances at the Corso Theater in Zurich, he left audiences stunned. In plain view Dajo would have an assistant stick a fencing foil completely through his body, clearly piercing vital organs but causing Dajo no harm or pain. Like Schwarz, when the foil was removed, Dajo did not bleed and only a faint red line marked the spot where the foil had entered and exited.
Dajo's performance proved so nerve-racking to his audiences that eventually one spectator suffered a heart attack, and Dajo was legally banned from performing in public. However, a Swiss doctor named Hans Naegeli-Osjord learned of Dajo's alleged abilities and asked him if he would submit to scientific scrutiny. Dajo agreed, and on May 31, 1947, he entered the Zurich cantonal hospital. In addition to Dr. Naegeli-Osjord, Dr. Werner Brunner, the chief of surgery at the hospi- tal, was also present, as were numerous other doctors, students, and journalists. Dajo bared his chest and concentrated, and then, in full view of the assemblage, he had his assistant plunge the foil through his body.
	As always, no blood flowed and Dajo remained completely at ease. But he was the only one smiling. The rest of the crowd had turned to stone. By all rights, Dajo's vital organs should have been severely damaged, and his seeming good health was almost too much for the doctors to bear. Filled with disbelief, they asked Dajo if he would submit to an X ray. He agreed and without apparent effort accompa- nied them up the stairs to the X-ray room, the foil still through his abdomen. The X ray was taken and the result was undeniable. Dajo was indeed impaled. Finally, a full twenty minutes after he had been pierced, the foil was removed, leaving only two faint scars. Later, Dajo was tested by scientists in Basel, and even let the doctors themselves run him through with the foil. Dr. Naegeli-Osjord later related the entire case to the German physicist Alfred Stelter, and Stelter reports it in his book Psi-Healing.57
	Such supernormal feats of control are not limited to the Dutch. In the 1960s Gilbert Grosvenor, the president of the National Geographic Society, his wife, Donna, and a team of Geographic photographers visited a village in Ceylon to witness the alleged miracles of a local wonderworker named Mohotty. It seems that as a young boy Mohotty prayed to a Ceylonese divinity named Kataragama and told the god that if he cleared Mohotty's father of a murder charge, he, Mohotty, would do yearly penance in Kataragama's honor. Mohotty's father was cleared, and true to his word, every year Mohotty did his penance.
	This consisted of walking through fire and hot coals, piercing his cheeks with skewers, driving skewers into his arms from shoulder to wrist, sinking large hooks deep into his back, and dragging an enor- mous sledge around a courtyard with ropes attached to the hooks. As the Grosvenors later reported, the hooks pulled the flesh in Mohotty's back quite taut, and again there was no sign of blood. When Mohotty was finished and the hooks were removed, there weren't even any traces of wounds. The Geographic team photographed this unnerving display and published both pictures and an account of the incident in the April 1966 issue of National Geographic.58
In 1967 Scientific American published a report about a similar annual ritual in India. In that instance a different person was chosen each year by the local community,and after a generous amount of ceremony, two hooks large enough to hang a side of beef on were buried in the victim's back. Ropes that were pulled through the eyes of the hooks were tied to the boom of an ox cart, and the victim was then swung in huge arcs over the fields as a sacramental offering to the fertility gods. When the hooks were removed the victim was completely unharmed, there was no blood, and literally no sign of any punctures in the flesh itself. 59

OUR UNCONSCIOUSBELIEFS
	As we have seen, if we are not fortunate enough to have the self- mastery of a Dajo or a Mohotty, another way of accessing the healing force within us is to bypass the thick armor of doubt and skepticism that exists in our conscious minds. Being tricked with a placebo is one way of accomplishing this. Hypnosis is another. Like a surgeon reach- ing in and altering the condition of an internal organ, a skilled hypno-therapist can reach into our psyche and help us change the most important type of belief of all, our unconscious beliefs.
	Numerous studies have demonstrated irrefutably that under hyp- nosis a person can influence processes usually considered uncon- scious. For instance, like a multiple, deeply hypnotized persons can control allergic reactions, blood flow patterns, and nearsightedness. In addition, they can control heart rate, pain, body temperature, and even will away some kinds of birthmarks. Hypnosis can also be used to accomplish something that, in its own way, is every bit as remark- able as suffering no injury after a foil has been stuck through one's abdomen.
	That something involves a horribly disfiguring hereditary condition known as Brocq's disease. Victims of Brocq's disease develop a thick, horny covering over their skin that resembles the scales of a reptile. The skin can become so hardened and rigid that even the slightest movement will cause it to crack and bleed. Many of the so-called alligator-skinned people in circus sideshows were actually individuals with Brocq's disease, and because of the risk of infection, victims of Brocq's disease used to have relatively short lifespans.
	Brocq's disease was incurable until 1951 when a sixteen-year-old boy with an advanced case of the affliction was referred as a last resort to a hypnotherapist named A. A. Mason at the Queen Victoria Hospital in London. Mason discovered that the boy was a good hypnotic subject and could easily be put into a deep state of trance. While the boy was in trance, Mason told him that his Brocq's disease was healing and would soon be gone. Five days later the scaly layer covering the boy's left arm fell off,revealing soft, healthy flesh beneath. By the end of ten days the arm was completely normal. Mason and the boy continued to work on different body areas until all of the scaly skin was gone.
	The boy remained symptom-free for at least five years, at which point Mason lost touch with him.60
This is extraordinary because Brocq's disease is a genetic condition, and getting rid of it involves more than just controlling autonomic processes such as blood flow patterns and various cells of the immune system. It means tapping into the masterplan, our DNA programming itself. So, it would appear that when we access the right strata of our beliefs, our minds can override even our genetic makeup.

108-109
	There is strong evidence that belief, not divine intervention, is the prime mover in at least some so-called miraculous occurrences. Recall that Mohotty attained his supernormal self-control by praying to Kataragama, and unless we are willing to accept the existence of Katara- gama, Mohotty's abilities seem better explained by his deep and abiding belief that was divinely protected. The same seems to be true of many miracles produced by Christian wonder-workers and saints.
	One Christian miracle that appears to be generated by the power of the mind is stigmata. Most church scholars agree that St. Francis of Assisi was the first person to manifest spontaneously the wounds of the crucifixion, but since his death there have been literally hundreds of other stigmatists. Although no two ascetics exhibit the stigmata in quite the same way, all have one thing in common. From St. Francis on, all have had wounds on their hands and feet that represent where Christ was nailed to the cross. This is not what one would expect if stigmata were God-given. As parapsychologist D. Scott Rogo, a mem- ber of the graduate faculty at John F. Kennedy University in Orinda, California, points out, it was Roman custom to place the nails through the wrists, and skeletal remains from the time of Christ bear this out. Nails inserted through the hands cannot support the weight of a body hanging on a cross.62
	Why did St. Francis and all the other stigmatists who came after him believe the nail holes passed through the hands? Because that is the way the wounds have been depicted by artists since the eighth century. That the position and even size and shape of stigmata have been influenced by art is especially apparent in the case of an Italian stigmatist named Gemma Galgani, who died in 1903. Gemma's wounds pre- cisely mirrored the stigmata on her own favorite crucifix.
	Another researcher who believed stigmata are self-induced was Herbert Thurston, an English priest who wrote several volumes on miracles. In his tour de force The Physical Phenomena of Mysticism, published posthumously in 1952, he listed several reasons why he thought stigmata were a product of autosuggestion. The size, shape, and location of the wounds varies from stigmatist to stigmatist, an inconsistency that indicates they are not derived from a common source, i.e., the actual wounds of Christ. A comparison of the visions experienced by various stigmatists also shows little consistency, suggesting that they are not re-enactments of the historical crucifixion, but are instead products of the stigmatists' own minds. And perhaps most significant of all, a surprisingly large percentage of stigmatists also suffered from hysteria, a fact Thurston interpreted as a further indication that stigmata are the side effect of a volatile and abnormally emotional psyche, and not necessarily the product of an enlightened one.63 In view of such evidence it is small wonder that even some of the more liberal members of the Catholic leadership believe stigmata are the product of "mystical contemplation," that is, that they are created by the mind during periods of intense meditation.
	If stigmata are products of autosuggestion, the range of control the mind has over the body holographic must be expanded even further. Like Mohotty's wounds, stigmata can also heal with disconcerting speed. The almost limitless plasticity of the body is further evidenced in the ability of some stigmatists to grow nail-like protuberances in the middle of their wounds. Again, St. Francis was the first to display this phenomenon. According to Thomas of Celano, an eyewitness to St. Francis's stigmata and also his biographer: "His hands and feet seemed pierced in the midst by nails. These marks were round on the inner side of the hands and elongated on the outer side, and certain small pieces of flesh were seen like the ends of nails bent and driven back, projecting from the rest of the flesh. "64

110-111
	The holographic model has aroused the interest of researchers in the Soviet Union, and two Soviet psychologists, Dr. Alexander P. Dubrov and Dr. Veniamin N. Pushkin, have written extensively on the idea. They believe that the frequency processing capabilities of the brain do not in and of themselves prove the holographic nature of the images and thoughts in the human mind. They have, however, suggested what might constitute such proof. Dubrov and Pushkin believe that if an example could be found where the brain projected an image outside of itself, the holographic nature of the mind would be convincingly demonstrated. Or to use their own words, "Records of ejection of psychophysical structures outside the brain would provide direct evi- dence of brain holograms."65

[Alexander P. Dubrov and Veniamin N. Pushkin, Parapsychology and Contemporary Science, trans. Aleksandr Petrovich (New York: Plenum, 1982), p. 50.]

	In fact, St. Veronica Giuliani seems to supply such evidence. During the last years of her life she became convinced that the images of the Passion—a crown of thorns, three nails, a cross, and a sword—had become emblazoned on her heart. She drew pictures of these and even noted where they were located. After she died an autopsy revealed that the symbols were indeed impressed on her heart exactly as she had depicted them. The two doctors who performed the autopsy signed sworn statements attesting to their finding.66
	Other stigmatists have had similar experiences. St. Teresa of Avila had a vision of an angel piercing her heart with a sword, and after she died a deep fissure was found in her heart. Her heart, with the miraculous sword wound still clearly visible, is now on display as a relic in Alba de Tormes, Spain.67 A nineteenth-century French stigmatist named Marie-JulieJahenny kept seeing the image of a flower in her mind, and eventually a picture of the flower appeared on her breast. It remained there twenty years.6" Nor are such abilities limited to stigmatists. In 1913 a twelve-year-old girl from the village of Bussus- Bus-Suel, near Abbeville, France, made headlines when it was discovered that she could consciously command images, such as pictures of dogs and horses, to appear on her arms, legs, and shoulders. She could also produce words, and when someone asked her a question the answer would instantly appear on her skin.69
	Surely such demonstrations are examples of the ejection of psycho- physical structures outside the brain. In fact, in a way stigmata them- selves, especially those in which the flesh has formed into nail-like protrusions, are examples of the brain projecting images outside itself and impressing them in the soft clay of the body holographic. Dr. Michael Grosso, a philosopher at Jersey City State College who has written extensively on the subject of miracles, has also arrived at this conclusion. Grosso, who traveled to Italy to study Padre Pio's stigmata firsthand, states, "One of the categories in my attempt to analyze Padre Pio is to say that he had an ability to symbolically trans- form physical reality. In other words, the level of consciousness he was operating at enabled him to transform physical reality in the light of certain symbolic ideas. For example,he identified with the wounds of the crucifixion and his body became permeable to those psychic symbols, gradually assuming their form."70
	So it appears that through the use of images, the brain can tell the body what to do, including telling it to make more images. Images making images. Two mirrors reflecting each other infinitely. Such is the nature of the mind/body relationship in a holographic universe.

113-115
	Acupuncture Microsystems and the Little Man in the Ear 

	Before closing, one last piece of evidence of the body's holographic nature deserves to be mentioned. The ancient Chinese art of acupuncture is based on the idea that every organ and bone in the body is connected to specific points on the body's surface. By activating these acupuncture points, with either needles or some other form of stimulation, it is believed that diseases and imbalances affecting the parts of the body connected to the points can be alleviated and even cured. There are over a thousand acupuncture points organized in imaginary lines called meridians on the body's surface. Although still controversial, acupuncture is gaining acceptance in the medical community and has even been used successfully to treat chronic back pain in race- horses.
	In 1957 a French physician and acupuncturist named Paul Nogier published a book called Treatise of Auriculotherapy, in which he announced his discovery that in addition to the major acupuncture system, there are two smaller acupuncture systems on both ears. He dubbed these acupuncture microsystems and noted that when one played a kind of connect-the-dots game with them, they formed an anatomical map of a miniature human inverted like a fetus (see fig. 13). Unbeknownst to Nogier, the Chinese had discovered the "little man in the ear" nearly 4,000 years earlier, but a map of the Chinese ear system wasn't published until after Nogier had already laid claim to the idea.
	The little man in the ear is not just a charming aside in the history of acupuncture. Dr. Terry Oleson, a psychobiologist at the Pain Man- agement Clinic at the University of California at Los Angeles School of Medicine, has discovered that the ear microsystem can be used to diagnose accurately what's going on in the body. For instance, Oleson has discovered that increased electrical activity in one of the acupuncture points in the ear generally indicates a pathological condition (either past or present) in the corresponding area of the body. In one study, forty patients were examined to determine areas of their body where they experienced chronic pain. Following the examination, each patient was draped in a sheet to conceal any visible problems. Then an acupuncturist with no knowledge of the results examined only their ears. When the results were tallied it was discovered that the ear examinations were in agreement with the established medical diag- noses 75.2 percent of the time.72
ear diagram.jpg ¬

C • Chinese Ear Acupuncture System E • European Auriculotherapy System
FIGURE 13. The Little Man in the Ear. Acupuncturists have found that the acu- puncture points in the ear form the outline of a miniature human being. Dr. Terry Oleson, a psychobiologist at UCLA's School of Medicine, believes it is because the body is a hologram and each of its portions contains an image of the whole. [Copyright Dr. Terry Oleson, UCLA School of Medicine. Used by permission]

	Ear examinations can also reveal problems with the bones and inter- nal organs. Once when Oleson was out boating with an acquaintance he noticed an abnormally flaky patch of skin in one of the man's ears. From his research Oleson knew the spot corresponded to the heart, and he suggested to the man that he might want to get his heart checked. The man went to his doctor the next day and discovered he had a cardiac problemwhichrequired immediateopen-heart surgery.73
Oleson also uses electrical stimulation of the acupuncture points in the ear to treat chronic pain, weight problems, hearing loss, and virtu- ally all kinds of addiction. In one study of 14 narcotic-addicted individu- als, Oleson and his colleagues used ear acupuncture to eliminate the drug requirements of 12of them in an average of 5 days and with only minimal withdrawal symptoms.74 Indeed, ear acupuncture has proved so successful in bringing about rapid narcotic detoxification that clin- ics in both Los Angeles and New York are now using the technique to treat street addicts.
Why would the acupuncture points in the ear be aligned in the shape of a miniature human?Oleson believes it is because of the holographic nature of the mind and body. Just as every portion of a hologram contains the image of the whole, every portion of the body may also contain the image of the whole. "The ear holograph is, logically, con- nected to the brain holograph which itself is connected to the whole body," he states. "The way we use the ear to affect the rest of the body is by working through the brain holograph."75

116

	Richard Leviton, a contributing editor at East West magazine, who has written about the holographic implications of acupuncture mi- crosystems, thinks that alternative medical techniques—such as re- flexology,a type of massage therapy that involves accessing all points of the body through stimulation of the feet, and iridology, a diagnostic technique that involves examining the iris of the eye in order to deter- mine the condition of the body—may also be indications of the body's holographic nature. Leviton concedes that neither field has been ex- perimentally vindicated (studies of iridology, in particular, have pro- duced extremely conflicting results) but feels the holographic idea offers a way of understanding them if their legitimacy is established.
	Leviton thinks there may even be something to palmistry. By this he does not mean the type of hand reading practiced by fortune-tellers who sit in glass storefronts and beckon people in, but the 4,500-year- old Indian version of the science. He bases this suggestion on his own profound encounter with an Indian hand reader living in Montreal who possessed a doctorate in the subject from Agra University, India. "The holographic paradigm provides palmistry's more esoteric and contro- versial claims a context for validation," says Leviton.77

117
Researchers at West Germany's Institute of Dermatoglyphics in Hamburg have even developed a computer system that uses an opto- electric scanner to take a digitized "photo" of a patient's hand. It then compares the hand to the 10,000 other prints in its memory, scans it for the nearly 50 distinctive patterns now known to be associated with various hereditary disabilities, and quickly calculates the patient's risk factors.79 So perhaps we should not be so quick to dismiss palmistry out of hand. The lines and whorls in our palms may contain more about our whole self than we realize.


5 A Pocket Full of Miracles
119-121
	Every year in September and May a huge crowd gathers at the Duomo San Gennaro, the principal cathedral of Naples, to witness a miracle. The miracle involves a small vial containing a brown crusty substance alleged to be the blood of San Gennaro, or St. Januarius, who was beheaded by the Roman emperor Diocletian in A.D. 305. According to legend, after the saint was martyred a serving woman collected some of his blood as a relic. No one knows precisely what happened after that, save that the blood didn't turn up again until the end of the thirteenth century when it was ensconced in a silver reliquary in the cathedral.
	The miracle is that twice yearly, when the crowd shouts at the vial, the brown crusty substance changes into a bubbling, bright red liquid. There is little doubt that the liquid is real blood. In 1902 a group of scientists from the University of Naples made a spectroscopic analysis of the liquid by passing a beam of light through it, verifying that it was blood. Unfortunately, because the reliquary containing the blood is so old and fragile, the church will not allow it to be cracked open so that other tests can be done, and so the phenomenon has never been thoroughly studied.
	But there is further evidence that the transformation is a more than ordinary event. Occasionally throughout history (the first written ac- count of the public performance of the miracle dates back to 1389} when the vial is brought out, the blood refuses to liquefy. Although rare, this is considered a very bad omen by the citizens of Naples. In the past, the failure of the miracle has directly preceded the eruption of Vesuvius and the Napoleonic invasion of Naples. More recently, in 1976 and 1978, it presaged the worst earthquake in Italian history and the election of a communist city government in Naples, respectively.
	Is the liquefaction of San Gennaro's blood a miracle? It appears to be, at least in the sense that it seems impossible to explain by known scientific laws. Is the liquefaction caused by San Gennaro himself? My own feeling is that its more likely cause is the intense devotion and belief of the people witnessing the miracle. I say this because nearly all of the miracles performed by saints and wonder-workers of the world's great religions have also been duplicated by psychics. This suggests that, as with stigmata, miracles are produced by forces lying deep in the human mind, forces that are latent in all of us. Herbert Thurston, the priest who wrote The Physical Phenomena of Mysti- cism, himself was aware of this similarity and was reluctant to attribute any miracle to a truly supernatural cause (as opposed to a psychic or paranormal cause). Another piece of evidence supportive of this idea is that many stigmatists, including Padre Pio and Therese Neu- mann, were also renowned for their psychic abilities.
	One psychic ability that appears to play a role in miracles is psycho- kinesis or PK. Since the miracle of San Gennaro involves a physical alteration of matter, PK is certainly a likely suspect. Rogo believes PK is also responsible for some of the more dramatic aspects of stigmata. He feels that it is well within the normal biological capabilities of the body to cause small blood vessels under the skin to break and produce superficial bleeding, but only PK can account for the rapid appearance of large wounds.1 Whether this is true or not remains to be seen, but PK is clearly a factor in some of the phenomena that accompany stigmata. When blood flowed from the wounds in Therese Neumann's feet, it always flowed toward her toes—exactly as it would have flowed from Christ's wounds when he was on the cross—regardless of how her feet were positioned. This meant that when she was sitting upright in bed, the blood actually flowed upward and counter to theforce of gravity. This was observed by numerous witnesses, including many U.S. servicemen stationed in Germany after the war who visited Neu- mann to witness her miraculous abilities. Gravity-defying flows of blood have been reported in other cases of stigmata as well.2
Such events leave us agog because our current worldview does not provide us with a context with which to understand PK. Bohm believes viewing the universe as a holomovement does provide us with a con- text. To explain what he means he asks us to consider the following situation. Imagine you are walking down a street late one night and a shadow suddenly looms up out of nowhere. Your first thought might be that the shadow is an assailant and you are in danger. The information contained in this thought will in turn give rise to a range of imagined activities, such as running, being hurt, and fighting. The presence of these imagined activities in your mind, however, is not a purely "mental" process, for they are inseparable from a host of related biological processes, such as excitation of nerves, rapid heart beat, release of adrenaline and other hormones, tensing of the muscles, and so on. Conversely, if your first thought is that the shadow is just a shadow, a different set of mental and biological responses will follow. Moreover, a little reflection will reveal that we react both mentally and biologically to everything we experience.
	According to Bohm, the important point to be gleaned from this is that consciousness is not the only thing that can respond to meaning. The body can also respond, and this reveals that meaning is simultaneously both mental and physical in nature. This is odd, for we normally think of meaning as something that can only have an active effect on subjective reality, on the thoughts inside our heads, not something that can engender a response in the physical world of things and objects. Meaning "can thus serve as the link or 'bridge' between these two sides of reality, " Bohm states. "This link is indivisible in the sense that information contained in thought, which we feel to be on the 'mental' side, is at the same time a neurophysiological, chemical, and physical activity, which is clearly what is meant by this thought on the 'material' side. ":i

122-124
	Another researcher whose ideas about PK are similar to Bohm's, but who has taken them one step further, is Robert G. Jahn, a professor of aerospace sciences and dean emeritus of the School of Engineering and Applied Science at Princeton University. Jahn's involvement in the study of PK happened quite by accident. A former consultant for both NASA and the Department of Defense, his original field of interest was deep space propulsion. In fact, he is the author of Physics of Electric Propulsion, the leading textbook in the field, and didn't even believe in the paranormal when a student first approached him and asked him to oversee a PK experiment she wanted to do as an independent study project. Jahn reluctantly agreed, and the results were so provocative they inspired him to found the Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR) lab in 1979. Since then PEAR researchers have not only produced compelling evidence of the existence of PK, but have gathered more data on the subject than anyone else in the country.
	In one series of experiments Jahn and his associate, clinical psychologist Brenda Dunne, employed a device called a random event generator, or REG. By relying on an unpredictable natural process such as radioactive decay, a REG is able to produce a string of random binary numbers. Such a string might look something like this: 1, 2, 1, 2, 2, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1. In other words, a REG is a kind of automatic coin- flipper capable of producing an enormous number of coin flips in a very short time. As everyone knows, if you flip a perfectly weighted coin 1,000times, the odds are you will get a 50/50 split between heads and tails. In reality, out of any 1, 000 such flips, the split may vary a little in one direction or the other, but the greater the number of flips, the closer to 50/50 the split will become.
	What Jahn and Dunne did was have volunteers sit in front of the REG and concentrate on having it produce an abnormally large number of either heads or tails. Over the course of literally hundreds of thousands of trials they discovered that, through concentration alone, the volunteers did indeed have a small but statistically significant effect on the REG's output. They discovered two other things as well. The ability to produce PK effects was not limited to a few gifted individuals but was present in the majority of volunteers they tested.
	This suggests that most of us possess some degree of PK. They also discovered that different volunteers produced different and consistently distinctive results, results that were so idiosyncratic that Jahn and Dunne started calling them "signatures."5
	In another series of experiments Jahn and Dunne employed a pinball-like device that allows 9,000 three-quarter-inch marbles to circulate around 330 nylon pegs and distribute themselves into 19 collect- ing bins at the bottom. The device is contained in a shallow vertical frame ten feet high and six feet wide with a clear glass front so that volunteers can see the marbles as they fall and collect in the bins. Normally, more balls fall in the center bins than in the outer ones, and the overall distribution looks like a bell-shaped curve.
	As with the REG, Jahn and Dunne had volunteers sit in front of the machine and try to make more balls land in the outer bins than in the center ones. Again, over the course of a large number of runs, the operators were able to create a small but measurable shift in where the balls landed. In the REG experiments the volunteers only exerted a PK effect on microscopic processes, the decay of a radioactive sub- stance, but the pinball experiments revealed that test subjects could use PK to influence objects in the everyday world as well. What's more, the "signatures" of individuals who had participated in the REG experiments surfaced again in the pinball experiments, suggesting that the PK abilities of any given individual remain the same from experiment to experiment, but vary from individual to individual just as other talents vary. Jahn and Dunne state, "While small segments of these results might reasonably be discounted as falling too close to chance behavior to justify revision of prevailing scientific tenets, taken in concert the entire ensemble establishes an incontrovertible aberration of substantial proportions."6
	Jahn and Dunne think their findings may explain the propensity some individuals seem to have for jinxing machinery and causing equipment to malfunction. One such individual was physicist Wolf- gang Pauli, whose talents in this area are so legendary that physicists have jokingly dubbed it the "Pauli effect. " It is said that Pauli's mere presence in a laboratory would cause a glass apparatus to explode, or a sensitive measuring device to crack in half. In one particularly fa- mous incident a physicist wrote Pauli to say that at least he couldn't blame Pauli for the recent and mysterious disintegration of a compli- cated piece of equipment since Pauli had not been present, only to find that Pauli had been passing by the laboratory in a train at the precise moment of the mishap! Jahn and Dunne think the famous "Gremlin effect, " the tendency of carefully tested pieces of equipment to undergo inexplicable malfunctions at the most absurdly inopportune moments, often reported by pilots, aircrew, and military operators, may also be an example of unconscious PK activity.
	If our minds can reach out and alter the movement of a cascade of
marbles or the operation of a machine, what strange alchemy might account for such an ability? Jahn and Dunne believe that since all known physical processes possess a wave/particle duality, it is not unreasonable to assume that consciousness does as well. When it is particle like, consciousness would appear to be localized in our heads, but in its wavelike aspect, consciousness, like all wave phenomena, could also produce remote influence effects. They believe one of these remote influence effects is PK.
	But Jahn and Dunne do not stop here. They believe that reality is itself the result of the interface between the wavelike aspects of consciousness and the wave patterns of matter. However, like Bohm, they do not believe that consciousness or the material world can be productively represented in isolation, or even that PK can be thought of as the transmission of some kind of force. "The message may be more subtle than that," says Jahn. "It may be that such concepts are simply unviable, that we cannot talk profitably about an abstract environment or an abstract consciousness. The only thing we can experience is the interpenetration of the two in some way. "7
126-130
	So far, PK effects produced in the lab have been limited to relatively small objects, but the evidence suggests that some individuals at least can use PK to bring about even greater changes in the physical world. Biologist Lyall Watson, author of the bestselling book Supernature and a scientist who has studied paranormal events all over the world, encountered one such individual while visiting the Philippines. The man was one of the so-called Philippine psychic healers, but instead of touching a patient, all he did was hold his hand about ten inches over the person's body, point at his or her skin, and an incision would appear instantaneously. Watson not only witnessed several displays of the man's psychokinetic surgical skills, but once, when the man made a broader sweep with his finger than usual, Watson received an incision on the back of his own hand. He bears the scar to this day.11
	There is evidence that PK abilities can also be used to heal bones. Several examples of such healings have been reported by Dr. Rex Gardner, a physician at Sunderland District General Hospital in En- gland. One interesting aspect of a 1983 article in the British Medical Journal is that Gardner, an avid investigator of miracles, presents contemporary miraculous healings side by side with examples of vir- tually identical healings collected by seventh-century English historian and theologian the Venerable Bede.
	The present-day healing involved a group of Lutheran nuns living in Darmstadt, Germany. The nuns were building a chapel when one of the sisters broke through a freshly cemented floor and fell onto a wooden beam below. She was rushed to the hospital where X rays revealed that she had a compound pelvic fracture. Instead of relying on standard medical techniques, the nuns held an all-night prayer vigil. Despite the doctors' insistence that the sister should remain in traction for many weeks, the nuns took her home two days later and continued to pray and perform a laying on of hands. To their surprise, immediately following the laying on of hands, the sister stood up from her bed, free of the excruciating pain of the fracture and apparently healed. It took her only two weeks to achieve a full recovery, where- upon she returned to the hospital and presented herself to her astonished doctor.13
	Although Gardner does not try to account for this or any of the other healings he discusses in his article, PK seems a likely explana- tion. Given that the natural healing of a fracture is a lengthy process, and even the miraculous regeneration of Michelli's pelvis took several months, it is suggested that perhaps the unconscious PK abilities of the nuns performing the laying on of hands accomplished the task.
Gardner describes a similar healing that occurred in the seventh century during the building of the church at Hexham, England, and involving St. Wilfrid, then the bishop of Hexham. During the construction of the church a mason named Bothelm fell from a great height, breaking both his arms and legs. As he lay dying, Wilfrid prayed over him and asked the other workmen to join him. They did, "the breath of life returned" to Bothelm, and he healed rapidly. Since the healing apparently did not take place until St. Wilfred asked the other work- men to join him, one wonders if St. Wilfred was the catalyst, or again if it was the combined unconsciousPK of the entire assemblage?
	Dr. William Tufts Brigham, the curator of the Bishop Museum in Honolulu and a noted botanist who devoted much of his private life to investigating the paranormal, recorded an incident in which a broken bone was instantaneously healed by a native Hawaiian shaman, or kahuna. The incident was witnessed by a friend of Brigham's named J. A. K. Combs. Combs's grandmother-in-law was considered one of the most powerful women kahunas in the islands, and once, while attending a party at the woman's home, Combs observed her abilities firsthand.
	On the occasion in question, one of the guests slipped and fell in the beach sand, breaking his leg so severely that the bone ends pressed visibly out against the skin. Recognizing the seriousness of the break, Combs recommended that the man be taken to a hospital immediately, but the elderly kahuna would hear none of it. Kneeling beside the man, she straightened his leg and pushed on the area where the fractured bones pressed out against his skin. After praying and meditating for several minutes she stood up and announced that the healing was finished. The man rose wonderingly to his feet, took a step, and then another. He was completely healed and his leg showed no indication of the break in any way.1'1
Mass Psychokinesis in Eighteenth-Century France
	Such incidents notwithstanding, one of the most astounding manifestations of psychokinesis, and one of the most remarkable displays of miraculous events ever recorded, took place in Paris in the first half of the eighteenth century. The events centered around a puritanical sect of Dutch-influenced Catholics known as the Jansenists, and were precipitated by the death of a saintly and revered Jansenist deacon named Francois de Paris. Although few people living today have even heard of the Jansenist miracles, they were one of the most talked about events in Europe for the better part of a century.
	To understand fully the Jansenist miracles, it is necessary to know a little about the historical events that preceded François de Paris's death. Jansenism was founded in the early seventeenth century, and from the start it was at odds with both the Roman Catholic Church and the French monarchy. Many of the beliefs diverged sharply with stan- dard church doctrine but it was a popular movement and quickly gained followers among the French populace. Most damning of all, it was viewed by both the papacy and King Louis XV,a devout Catholic, as Protestantism only masquerading as Catholicism. As a result, both the church and the king were constantly maneuvering to undermine the movement's power. One obstacle to these maneuverings, and one of the factors that contributed to the movement's popularity, was that Jansenist leaders seemed especially skilled at performing miraculous healings. Nonetheless, the church and the monarchy persevered, caus- ing fierce debates to rage throughout France. It was on May 1, 1727, at the height of this power struggle, that Francois de Paris died and was interred in the parish cemetery of Saint-Medard, Paris.
	Because of the abbe's saintly reputation, worshipers began to gather at his tomb, and from the beginning a host of miraculous healings were reported. The ailments thus cured included cancerous tumors, paralysis, deafness, arthritis, rheumatism, ulcerous sores, persistent fevers, prolonged hemorrhaging, and blindness. But this was not all. The mourners also started to experience strange involun- tary spasms or convulsions and to undergo the most amazing contor- tions of their limbs. These seizures quickly proved contagious, spread- ing like a brush fire until the streets were packed with men, women, and children, all twisting and writhing as if caught up in a surreal enchantment.
	It was while they were in this fitful and trancelike state that the "convulsionaires, " as they have come to be called, displayed the most phenomenal of their talents. One was the ability to endure without harm an almost unimaginable variety of physical tortures. These included severe beatings, blows from both heavy and sharp objects, and strangulation—all with no sign of injury, or even the slightest trace of wounds or bruises.
	What makes these miraculous events so unique is that they were witnessed by literally thousands of observers. The frenzied gatherings around Abbe Paris's tomb were by no means short-lived. The cemetery and the streets surrounding it were crowded day and night for years, and even two decades later miracles were still being re- ported (to give some idea of the enormity of the phenomena, in 1733 it was noted in the public records that over 3,000 volunteers were needed simply to assist the convulsionaires and make sure, for exam- ple, that the female participants did not become immodestly exposed during their seizures). As a result, the supernormal abilities of the convulsionaires became an international cause celebre, and thousands flocked to see them, including individuals from all social strata and officials from every educational, religious, and governmental institution imaginable; numerous accounts, both official and unofficial, of the miracles witnessed are recorded in the documents of the time.
	Moreover, many of the witnesses, such as the investigators from the Roman Catholic Church, had a vested interest in refuting the Jansenist miracles, but they still went away confirming them (the Roman Catholic Church later remedied this embarrassing state of affairs by conceding that the miracles existed but were the work of the devil, hence proving that the Jansenists were depraved).
	One investigator, a member of the Paris Parliament named Louis- Basile Carre de Montgeron, witnessed enough miracles to fill four thick volumes on the subject, which he published in 1737 under the title La Vérité des Miracles. In the work he provides numerous examples of the convulsionaries' apparent invulnerability to torture. In one in- stance a twenty-year-old convulsionaire named Jeanne Maulet leaned against a stone wall while a volunteer from the crowd, "a very strong man," delivered one hundred blows to her stomach with a thirty-pound hammer (the convulsionaires themselves asked to be tortured because they said it relieved the excruciating pain of the convulsions). To test the force of the blows, Montgeron himself then took the hammer and tried it on the stone wall against which the girl had leaned. He wrote, "At the twenty-fifth blow the stone upon which I struck, which had been shaken by the preceding efforts, suddenly became loose and fell on the other side of the wall, making an aperture more than half a foot in size."15

134
	Although the kahunas of Hawaii do not walk through roaring furnaces, there are reports that they can stroll across hot lava without being harmed. Brigham told of meeting three kahunas who promised to perform the feat for him, and of following them on a lengthy trek to a lava flow near the erupting Kilauea. They chose a 150-foot-wide lava flow that had cooled enough to support their weight, but was so hot that patches of incandescence still coursed through its surface. As Brigham watched, the kahunas took off their sandals and started to recite the lengthy prayers necessary to protect them as they strolled out onto the barely hardened molten rock.
	As it turned out, the kahunas had told Brigham earlier that they could confer their fire immunity on him if he wanted to join them, and he had bravely agreed. But as he faced the baking heat of the Java he had second and even third thoughts. "The upshot of the matter was that I sat tight and refused to take off my boots, " Brigham wrote in his account of the incident. After they finished invoking the gods, the oldest kahuna scampered out onto the lava and crossed the 150 feet without harm. Impressed, but still adamant about not going, Brigham stood up to watch the next kahuna, only to be given a shove that forced him to break into a run to keep from falling face first onto the incandescent rock. And run Brigham did. When he reached higher ground on the other side he discovered that one of his boots had burned off and his socks were on fire. But, miraculously, his feet were completely unharmed. The kahunas had also suffered no harm and were rolling in laughter at Brigham's shock. "I laughed too," wrote Brigham. "I was never so relieved in my life as I was to find that I was safe. There is little more that I can tell of this experience. I had a sensation of intense heat on my face and body, but almost no sensation in my feet."21

136
	On September 7, 1871, the New York Herald reported that Nathan Coker, an elderly Negro blacksmith living in Easton, Maryland, could handle red-hot metal without being harmed. In the presence of a com- mittee that included several doctors, he heated an iron shovel until it was incandescent and then held it against the soles of his feet until it was cool. He also licked the edge of the red-hot shovel and poured melted lead shot in his mouth, allowing it to run over his teeth and gums until it solidified. After each of these feats the doctors examined him and found no trace of injury.28
	While on a hunting trip in 1927 in the Tennessee mountains, K. R. Wissen, a New Y ork physician, encountered a twelve-year-old boy who was similarly impervious. Wissen watched the boy handle red-hot irons out of a fireplace with impunity. The boy told Wissen he had discovered his ability by accident when he picked up a red-hot horseshoe in his uncle's blacksmith shop.29 The pit of flaming embers the Grosvenors watched Mohotty walk through was twenty-feet long and measured 1328 degrees Fahrenheit on the National Geographic team's thermometers. In the May 1959 issue of the Atlantic Monthly, Dr. Leonard Feinberg of the University of Illinois reports witnessing another Ceylonese fire-walking ritual during which the natives carried red-hot iron pots on their heads without being harmed. In an article in Psychiatric Quarterly, psychiatrist Berthold Schwarz reports watching Appalachian Pentecostals hold their hands in an acetylene flame without being harmed,TM and so on, and so on.

138
	At this point we might ask, if consciousness can make such extraordinary alterations under special circumstances, what role does it play in the creation of our day-to-day reality? Opinions are extremely varied. In private conversation Bohm admits to believing that the uni- verse is all "thought" and reality exists only in what we think,32 but again he prefers not to speculate about miraculous occurrences. Pribram is similarly reticent to comment on specific events but does believe a number of different potential realities exist and conscious- ness has a certain amount of latitude in choosing which one manifests. "I don't believe anything goes, " he says, "but there are a lot of worlds out there that we don't understand."33 
	After years of firsthand experiences with the miraculous, Watson is bolder. "I have no doubt that reality is in a very large part a con- struct of the imagination. I am not speaking as a particle physicist or even as someone who is totally aware of what's going on in the fron- tier of that discipline, but I think we have the capacity to change the world around us in quite fundamental ways" (Watson, who was once enthusiastic about the holographic idea, is no longer convinced that any current theory in physics can adequately explain the supernormal abilities of the mind).34
	Gordon Globus, a professor of psychiatry and philosophy at the University of California at Irvine, has a different but similar view. Globus thinks the holographic theory is correct in its assertion that the mind constructs concrete reality out of the raw material of the impli- cate. However, he has also been greatly influenced by anthropologist Carlos Castaneda's now famous otherworldly experiences with the Yaqui Indian shaman, Don Juan. In stark contrast to Pribram, he believes that the seemingly inexhaustible array of "separate realities" Castaneda experienced under Don Juan's tutelage—and indeed even the equally vast array of realities we experience during ordinary dreaming—indicate that there are an infinite number of potential realities enfolded in the implicate. Moreover, because the holographic mechanisms the brain uses to construct everyday reality are the same ones it uses to construct our dreams and the realities we experience during Castanedaesque altered states of consciousness, he believes all three types of reality are fundamentally the same.35

140-142
	Jahn and Dunne are not so timid. They believe that instead of discovering particles, physicists may actually be creating them. As evidence, they cite a recently discovered subatomic particle called an anomalon, whose properties vary from laboratory to laboratory. Imagine owning a car that had a different color and different features depending on who drove it! This is very curious and seems to suggest that an anomalon's reality depends on who finds/creates it.; 39
	Similar evidence may also be found in another subatomic particle. In the 1930s Pauli proposed the existence of a massless particle called a neutrino to solve an outstanding problem concerning radioactivity. For years the neutrino was only an idea, but then in 1957 physicists discovered evidence of its existence. In more recent years, however, physicists have realized that if the neutrino possessed some mass, it would solve several even thornier problems than the one facing Pauli, and lo and behold in 1980 evidence started to come in that the neutrino had a small but measurable mass! This is not all. As it turned out, only laboratories in the Soviet Union discovered neutrinos with mass. Laboratories in the United States did not. This remained true for the better part of the 1980s, and although other laboratories have now duplicated the Soviet findings, the situation is still unresolved.40
	Is it possible that the different properties displayed by neutrinos are due at least in part to the changing expectations and different cultural biases of the physicists who searched for them? If so, such a state of affairs raises an interesting question. If physicists do not discover the subatomic world but create it, why do some particles, such as electrons, appear to have a stable reality no matter who observes them? In other words, why does a physics student with no knowledge of an electron still discover the same characteristics that a seasoned physicist discovers?
	One possible answer is that our perceptions of the world may not be based solely on the information we receive through our five senses.
	As fantastic as this may sound, a very good case can be made for such a notion. Before explaining, I would like to relate an occurrence I witnessed in the middle 1970s. My father had hired a professional hypnotist to entertain a group of friends at his house and had invited me to attend the event. After quickly determining the hypnotic susceptibility of the various individuals present, the hypnotist chose a friend of my father's named Tom as his subject. This was the first time Tom had ever met the hypnotist.
	Tom proved to be a very good subject, and within seconds the hypnotist had him in a deep trance. He then proceeded with the usual tricks performed by stage hypnotists. He convincedTom there was a giraffe in the room and had Tom gaping in wonder. He told Tom that a potato was really an apple and had Tom eat it with gusto. But the highlight of the evening was when he told Tom that when he came out of trance, his teenage daughter, Laura, would be completely invisible to him. Then, after having Laura stand directly in front of the chair in which Tom was sitting, the hypnotist awakened him and asked him if he could see her.
	Tom looked around the room and his gaze appeared to pass right through his giggling daughter. "No," he replied. The hypnotist asked Tom if he was certain, and again, despite Laura's rising giggles, he answered no. Then the hypnotist went behind Laura so he was hidden from Tom's view and pulled an object out of his pocket. He kept the object carefully concealed so that no one in the room could see it, and pressed it against the small of Laura's back. He asked Tom to identify the object. Tom leaned forward as if staring directly through Laura's stomach and said that it was a watch. The hypnotist nodded and asked if Tom could read the watch's inscription. Tom squinted as if struggling to make out the writing and recited both the name of the watch's owner (which happened to be a person unknown to any of us in the room) and the message. The hypnotist then revealed that the object was indeed a watch and passed it around the room so that everyone could see that Tom had read its inscription correctly.
	When I talked to Tom afterward, he said that his daughter had been absolutely invisible to him. All he had seen was the hypnotist standing and holding a watch cupped in the palm of his hand. Had the hypnotist let him leave without telling him what was going on, he never would have known he wasn't perceiving normal consensus reality.
	Obviously Tom's perception of the watch was not based on information he was receiving through his five senses. Where was he getting the information from? One explanation is that he was obtaining it telepathically from someone else's mind, in this case, the hypnotist's. The ability of hypnotized individuals to "tap" into the senses of other people has been reported by other investigators. The British physicist Sir William Barrett found evidence of the phenomenon in a series of experiments with a young girl. After hypnotizing the girl he told her that she would taste everything he tasted. "Standing behind the girl, whose eyes I had securely bandaged, I took up some salt and put it in my mouth; instantly she sputtered and exclaimed, 'What for are you putting salt in my mouth?' Then I tried sugar; she said That's better'; asked what it was like, she said 'Sweet. ' Then mustard, pepper, ginger, et cetera were tried; each was named and apparently tasted by the girl when I put them in my own mouth."41
In his book Experiments in Distant Influence	the Soviet physiolo- gist Leonid Vasiliev cites a German study conducted in the 1950s that produced similar findings. In that study, the hypnotized subject not only tasted what the hypnotist tasted, but blinked when a light was flashed in the hypnotist's eyes, sneezed when the hypnotist took a whiff of ammonia, heard the ticking of a watch held to the hypnotist's ear, and experienced pain when the hypnotist pricked himself with a needle—all done in a manner that safeguarded against her obtaining the information through normal sensory cues.42
	Our ability to tap into the senses of others is not limited to hypnotic states. In a now famous series of experiments physicists Harold Puthoff and Russell Targ of the Stanford Research Institute in California found that just about everyone they tested had a capacity they call "remote viewing," the ability to describe accurately what a distant test subject is seeing. They found that individual after individual could remote-view simply by relaxing and describing whatever images came into their minds.43 Puthoff and Targ's findings have been duplicated by dozens of laboratories around the world, indicating that remote viewing is probably a widespread latent ability in all of us.
	The Princeton Anomalies Research lab has also corroborated Puthoff and Targ's findings. In one study Jahn himself served as the receiver and tried to perceive what a colleague was observing in Paris, a city Jahn has never visited. In addition to seeing a bustling street, an image of a knight in armor came into Jahn's mind. It later turned out that the sender was standing in front of a government building ornamented with statuary of historical military figures, one of whom was a knight in armor.44
So it appears that we are deeply interconnected with each other in yet another way, a situation that is not so strange in a holographic universe. Moreover, these interconnections manifest even when we are not consciously aware of them. Studies have shown that when a person in one room is given an electric shock, it will register in the polygraph readings of a person in another room.45 A light flashed in a test subject's eyes will register in the EEG readings of a test subject isolated in another room,46 and even the blood volume of a test subject's finger changes—as measured by a plethysmograph, a sensitive indicator of autonomic nervous system functioning—when a "sender" in another room encounters the name of someone they know while reading a list composed mainly of names unknown to them.47
	Given both our deep interconnectedness and our ability to construct entirely convincing realities out of information received via this inter- connectedness, such as Tom did, what would happen if two or more hypnotized individuals tried to construct the same imaginary reality? Intriguingly, this question has been answered in an experiment con- ducted by Charles Tart, a professor of psychology at the Davis campus of the University of California. Tart found two graduate students, Anne and Bill, who could go into deep trance and were also skilled hypnotists in their own right. He had Anne hypnotize Bill and after he was hypnotized, he had Bill hypnotize her in return. Tart's reasoning was that the already powerful rapport that exists between hypnotist and subject would be strengthened by using this unusual procedure.
	He was right. When they opened their eyes in this mutually hypnotized state everything looked gray. However, the grayness quickly gave way to vivid colors and glowing lights, and in a few moments they found themselves on a beach of unearthly beauty. The sand sparkled like diamonds, the sea was filled with enormous frothing bubbles and glistened like champagne, and the shoreline was dotted with translucent crystalline rocks pulsing with internal light. Al- though Tart could not see what Anne and Bill were seeing, from the way they were talking he quickly realized they were experiencing the same hallucinated reality.
	Of course, this was immediately obvious to Anne and Bill and they set about to explore their newfound world, swimming in the ocean and studying the glowing crystalline rocks. Unfortunately for Tart they also stopped talking, or at least they stopped talking from Tart's perspective. When he questioned them about their silence they told him that in their shared dreamworld they were talking, a phenomenon Tart feels involved some kind of paranormal communication between the two.
In session after session Anne and Bill continued to construct various realities, and all were as real, available to the five senses, and dimensionally realized, as anything they experienced in their normal waking state. In fact, Tart resolved that the worlds Anne and Bill visited we're actually more real than the pale, lunar version of reality with which most of us must be content. As he states, after "they had been talking about their experiences to each other for some time, and found they had been discussing details of the experiences they had shared for which there were no verbal stimuli on the tapes, they felt they must have actually been 'in' the nonworldly locales they had experienced. "48
	Anne and Bill's ocean world is the perfect example of a holographic reality—a three-dimensional construct created out of interconnected- ness, sustained by the flow of consciousness, and ultimately as plastic as the thought processes that engendered it. This plasticity was evident in several of its features. Although it was three-dimensional, its space was more flexible than the space of everyday reality and some- times took on an elasticity Anne and Bill had no words to describe. Even stranger, although they were clearly highly skilled at sculpting a shared world outside themselves, they frequently forgot to sculpt their own bodies, and existed more often than not as floating faces or heads. As Anne reports, on one occasion when Bill told her to give him her hand, "I had to kind of conjure up a hand."49
	How did this experiment in mutual hypnosis end? Sadly, the idea that these spectacular visions were somehow real, perhaps even more real than everyday reality, so frightened both Anne and Bill that they became increasingly nervous about what they were doing. They eventually stopped their explorations, and one of them, Bill, even gave up hypnosis entirely.

…
145
Human consciousness may not be the only thing that participates in the creation of reality-fields. Remote viewing experiments have shown that people can accurately describe distant locations even when there are no human observers present at the locations.51 Similarly, subjects can identify the contents of a sealed box randomly selected from a group of sealed boxes and whose contents are therefore completely unknown.:'2 This means that we can do more than just tap into the senses of other people. We can also tap into reality itself to gain information. As bizarre as this sounds, it is not so strange when one remembers that in a holographic universe, consciousness pervades all matter, and "meaning" has an active presence in both the mental and physical worlds.

146
	Jahn and Dunne have a similar view. Although they believe reality is established only in the interaction of a consciousness with its environment, they are very liberal in how they define consciousness. As they see it, anything capable of generating, receiving, or utilizing information can qualify. Thus, animals, viruses, DNA, machines (artificially intelligent and otherwise), and so-called nonliving objects may all have the prerequisite properties to take part in the creation of r e a l i t y .54
	If such assertions are true, and we can obtain information not only from the minds of other human beings but from the living hologram of reality itself, psychometry—the ability to obtain information about an object's history simply by touching it—would also be explained. Rather than being inanimate, such an object would be suffused with its own kind of consciousness. Instead of being a "thing" that exists separately from the universe, it would be part of the interconnected- ness of all things—connected to the thoughts of every person who ever came in contact with it, connected to the consciousness that pervades every animal and object that was ever associated with its existence, connected via the implicate to its own past, and connected to the mind of the psychometrist holding it.

152-154
	Accounts of individuals who can materialize are not unknown in India. In his book Autobiography of a Yogi, Paramahansa Yogananda(1893-1952), the first eminent holy man of India to set up permanent residence in the West, describes his meetings with several Hindu ascetics who could materialize out-of-season fruits, gold plates, and other objects. Interestingly, Yogananda cautioned that such powers, or siddis, are not always evidence that the person possessing them is spiritually evolved. "The world [is] nothing but an objectivized dream," says Yogananda, and "whatever your powerful mind believes very intensely instantly comes to pass."61 Have such individuals dis- covered a way to tap just a little of the enormous sea of cosmic energy that Bohm says fills every cubic centimeter of empty space?
	A remarkable series of materializations that has received even greater confirmation than that bestowed by Haraldsson on Sai Baba was produced by Therese Neumann. In addition to her stigmata, Neumann also displayed inedia, the supernormal ability to live without food. Her inedia began in 1923 when she "transferred" the throat disease of a young priest to her own body and subsisted solely on liquids for several years. Then, in 1927, she gave up both food and water entirely.
	When the local bishop in Regensburg first learned of Neumann's fast, he sent a commissioninto her home to investigate. From July 14, 1927, to July 29, 1927, and under the supervision of a medical doctor named Seidl, four Franciscan nursing sisters scrutinized her every move. They watched her day and night, and the water she used for washing and rinsing her mouth was carefully measured and weighed. The sisters discovered several unusual things about Neumann. She never went to the bathroom (even after a period of six weeks she only had one bowel movement, and the excrement, examined by a Dr. Reismanns, contained only a small amount of mucus and bile, but no traces of food). She also showed no signs of dehydration, even though the average human expels about four hundred grams (fourteen ounces) of water daily in the air he or she exhales, and a like amount through the pores. And her weight remained constant; although she lost nearly nine pounds (in blood) during the weekly opening of her stigmata, her weight returned to normal within a day or two later.
	At the end of the inquiry Dr. Seidl and the sisters were completely convinced that Neumann had not eaten or drunk a thing for the entire fourteen days. The test seems conclusive, for while the human body can survive two weeks without food, it can rarely survive half that time without water. Yet this was nothing for Neumann; she did not eat or drink a thing for the next thirty-Jive years. So it appears that she was not only materializing the enormous amount of blood necessary to perpetuate her stigmata, but also regularly materializing the water and nutrients she needed to stay alive and in good health. Inedia is not unique to Neumann. In The Physical Phenomena of Mysticism, Thurston gives several examples of stigmatists who went for years without eating or drinking.

158
Physicist William Tiller, head of the Department of Materials Sci- ence at Stanford University and another supporter of the holographic idea, agrees. Tiller thinks reality is similar to the "holodeck" on the television show Star Trek: The Next Generation. In the series, the holodeck is an environment in which occupants can call up a holo- graphic simulation of literally any reality they desire, a lush forest, a bustling city. They can also change each simulation in any way they want, such as cause a lamp to materialize or make an unwanted table disappear. Tiller thinks the universe is also a kind of holodeck created by the "integration" of all living things. "We've created it as a vehicle of experience, and we've created the laws that govern it, " he asserts. "And when we get to the frontiers of our understanding, we can in fact shift the laws so that we're also creating the physics as we go along. "65

160
	As for me, as a result of my own experiences I agree with Don Juan when he states, "We are perceivers. We are an awareness; we are not objects; we have no solidity. We are boundless. The world of objects and solidity is a way of making our passage on earth convenient. It is only a description that was created to help us. We, or rather our reason, forget that the description is only a description and thus we entrap the totality of ourselves in a vicious circle from which we rarely emerge in our lifetime."6"
…
If this is true, the laws of physics and the substance of galaxies are not the only things that are reality fields. Even our bodies, the vehicles of our consciousness in this life, would have to be looked upon as no more or less real than anomalous and champagne beaches. Or as Keith Floyd, a psychologist at Virginia Interment College and another sup- porter of the holographic idea, states, "Contrary to what everyone knows is so, it may not be the brain that produces consciousness, but rather consciousness that creates the appearance of the brain—mat- ter, space, time and everything else we are pleased to interpret as the physical universe."69

181-183
Movies in the Aura
	The images that psychics see in the energy field are not always static. Rich says she often sees what looks like a little transparent movie going on around a client's head: "Sometimes I see a small image of the person behind their head or shoulders doing various things they do in life. My clients tell me that my descriptions are very accurate and specific. I can see their offices and what their bosses look like. I can see what they've thought of and what's happened to them during the last six months. Recently I told a client that I could see her home and she had masks and flutes hanging on her wall. She said, 'No, no, no.' I said yes, there are musical instruments hanging on the wall, mostly flutes, and there are masks. And then she said, 'Oh, that's my summer home.' "--1
	Dryer says she also sees what look like three-dimensional movies in a person's energy field. "Usually they're in color, but they can also be brown, or look like tintypes. Often they depict a story about the person that can take anywhere from five minutes to an hour to unfold. The images are also incredibly detailed. When I see a person sitting in a room I can tell them how many plants are in the room, how many leaves are on each plant, and how many bricks are in the wall. I usually don't get into such minute description unless it seems pertinent. "25
	I can attest to Dryer's accuracy. I have always been an organized person, and when I was a child I was quite precocious in this regard. Once when I was five years old I spent several hours meticulously storing and organizing all of my toys in a closet. When I was finished showed my mother what I had done and admonished her please not to touch anything in the closet because I did not want her messing up rny carefully ordered arrangements. My mother's account of this incident has amused the family ever since. During my first reading with Dryer she described this incident in detail, as well as many other events in my life, as she watched it unfold like a movie in my energy field. She, too, chuckled as she described it.
Dryer likens the images she sees to holograms and says that when she chooses one and starts to watch it, it seems to expand and fill the entire room. "If I see something going on with a person's shoulder, such as an injury, suddenly the whole scene widens. That's when I get the sense that it's a hologram because sometimes I feel I can step right into it and be a part of it. It's not happening to me, but around me. It's almost as if I'm in a three-dimensional movie, a holographic movie, with the person."26
	Dryer's holographic vision is not limited to events from a person's life. She sees visual representations of the operations of the unconscious mind as well. As we all know, the unconscious mind speaks in a language of symbols and metaphors. This is why dreams often seem so nonsensical and mysterious. However, once one learns how to interpret the language of the unconscious, the meanings of dreams become clear. Dreams are not the only things that are written in the parlance of the unconscious. Individuals who are familiar with the language of the psyche—a language psychologist Erich Fromm calls the "forgotten language, " because most of us have forgotten how to interpret it—recognize its presence in other human creations such as myths, fairy tales, and religious visions.
	Some of the holographic movies Dryer sees in the human energy field are also written in this language and resemble the metaphorical messages of dreams. We now know that the unconscious mind is active not only while we dream, but all of the time. Dryer is able to peel back a person's waking self and gaze directly at the unceasing river of images that is always flowing through their unconscious mind. And both practice and her natural, intuitive gifts have made her extremely skilled at deciphering the language of the unconscious. "Jung- ian psychologists love me," says Dryer.
	In addition, Dryer has a special way of knowing whether she has interpreted an image correctly. "If I haven't explained it correctly, it doesn't go away," she states. "It just stays in the energy field. But once I've told the person everything they need to know about a particu- lar image, it begins to dissolve and disappear. "27 Dryer thinks this is because it is a client's own unconscious mind that chooses what images to show her. Like Ullman, she believes the psyche is always trying to teach the conscious self things it needs to know to become healthier and happier, and to grow spiritually.
	Dryer's ability to observe and interpret the innermost workings of a person's psyche is one of the reasons she is able to effect such profound transformations in many of her clients. The first time she described the stream of images she saw unfolding in my own energy field, I had the uncanny sensation she was telling me about one of my own dreams, save that it was a dream I had not yet dreamed. At first the phantasmagoria of images was only mysteriously familiar, but as she unraveled and explained each symbol and metaphor in turn, I recognized the machinations of my inner self, both the things I accepted and the things I was less willing to embrace. Indeed, it is clear from the work of psychics like Rich and Dryer that there is an enormous amount of information in the energy field. One wonders if this is perhaps why Hunt obtained such a pronounced chaos pattern when she analyzed data from the aura.
	The ability to see images in the human energy field is not new. Nearly three hundred years ago the great Swedish mystic Emanuel Swedenborg reported that he could see a "wave-substance" around people, and in the wave-substance a person's thoughts were visible as images he called "portrayals. " In commenting on the inability of other people to see this wave-substance around the body, he observed, "I could see solid concepts of thought as though they were surrounded by a kind of wave. But nothing reaches [normal] human sensation except what is in the middle and seems solid. "28 Swedenborg could also see portrayals in his own energy field: "When I was thinking about someone I knew, then his image appeared as he looked when he was named in human presence; but all around, like something flowing in waves, was everything I had known and thought about him from boyhood."'^

190
A Participatory Reality
	Of course, these processes are not contingent on the subtle energy fields of the universe being stratified into rigidly defined layers. They could also work even if the subtle fields of the universe are a smooth continuum. In fact, given how sensitive these subtle fields are to our thoughts, we must be very careful when trying to form set ideas about their organization and structure. What we believe about them may in fact help mold and create their structure.
	This is perhaps why psychics disagree about whether the human energy field is divided into layers. Psychics who believe in clearly defined layers may actually be causing the energy field to form itself into layers. The individual whose energy field is being observed may also participate in this process. Brennan is very frank about this and notes that the more one of her clients understands the difference between the layers, the clearer and more distinct the layers of their energy field become. She admits that the structure she sees in the energy field is thus but one system, and others have come up with other systems. For example, the authors of the tantras, a collection of Hindu yogic texts written during the fourth through sixth centuries A.D., perceived only three layers in the energy field.
	There is evidence that the structures clairvoyants inadvertently create in the energy field can be remarkably long-lived. For centuries the ancient Hindus believed that each chakra also had a Sanskrit letter written in its center. Japanese researcher Hiroshi Motoyama, a clinical psychologist who has successfully developed a technique for measur- ing the electrical presence of the chakras, says that he first became interested in the chakras because his mother, a simple woman with natural clairvoyant gifts, could see them clearly. However, for years she was puzzled because she could see what looked like an inverted sailboat in her heart chakra. It wasn't until Motoyama began his own investigations that he discovered what his mother was seeing was the Sanskrit letter yam, the letter the ancient Hindus perceived in the heart chakra.41 Some psychics, such as Dryer, say that they also see Sanskrit letters in the chakras. Others do not.The only explanation appears to be that psychics who see the letters are actually tuning into holographic structures long ago imposed on the energy field by the beliefs of the ancient Hindus.
At first glance this notion may seem strange, but it does have a precedent As we have seen, one of the basic tenets of quantum phys- ics is that we are not discovering reality, but participating in its cre- ation. It may be that as we probe deeper into the levels of reality beyond the atom, the levels where the subtle energies of the human aura appear to lie, the participatory nature of reality becomes even more pronounced. Thus we must be extremely cautious about saying that we have discovered a particular structure or pattern in the human energy field, when we may have actually created what we have found.

192
	Hunt does such findings one better. She has discovered that the human energy field responds to stimuli even before the brain does. She has taken EMG readings of the energy field and EEC readings of the brain simultaneously and discovered that when she makes a loud sound or flashes a bright light, the EMG of the energy field registers the stimulus before it ever shows up on the EEC. What does it mean? "I think we have way overrated the brain as the active ingredient in the relationship of a human to the world," says Hunt. "It's just a real good computer. But the aspects of the mind that have to do with creativity, imagination, spirituality, and all those things, I don't see them in the brain at all. The mind's not in the brain. It's in that darn field. "44

197 - 199
	As the man gazed off into space, the room he was in became ghostly and transparent, and in its place materialized a scene from the distant past Suddenly he was in the courtyard of a palace, and before him was a young woman, olive-skinned and very pretty. He could see her gold jewelry around her neck, wrists, and ankles, her white translucent dress, and her black braided hair gathered regally under a high square-shaped tiara. As he looked at her, information about her life flooded his mind. He knew she was Egyptian, the daughter of a prince, but not a pharaoh. She was married. Her husband was slender and wore his hair in a multitude of small braids that fell down on both sides of his face.
	The man could also fast-forward the scene, rushing through the events of the woman's life as if they were no more than a movie. He saw that she died in childbirth. He watched the lengthy and intricate steps of her embalming, her funeral procession, the rituals that accompanied her being placed in her sarcophagus, and when he finished, the images faded and the room once again came back into view.
	The man's name was Stefan Ossowiecki, a Russian-born Pole and one of the century's most gifted clairvoyants, and the date was February 14, 1935. His vision of the past had been evoked when he handled a fragment of a petrified human foot.
Ossowiecki proved so adept at psycho metrizing artifacts that he eventually came to the attention of Stanislaw Poniatowski, a professor at the University of Warsaw and the most eminent ethnologist in Poland at the time. Poniatowski tested Ossowiecki with a variety of flints and other stone tools obtained from archaeological sites around the world. Most of these lithics, as they are called, were so nondescript that only a trained eye could tell they had been shaped by human hands. They were also precertified by experts so that Poniatowski knew their ages and historical origins, information he kept carefully concealed from Ossowiecki.
It did not matter. Again and again Ossowiecki identified the objects correctly, describing their age, the culture that had produced them, and the geographical locations where they had been found. On several occasions the locations Ossowiecki cited disagreed with the information Poniatowski had written in his notes, but Poniatowski discovered that it was always his notes that were in error, not Ossowiecki's information.
	Ossowiecki always worked the same. He would take the object in his hands and concentrate until the room before him, and even his own body, became shadowy and almost nonexistent. After this transition occurred, he would find himself looking at a three-dimensional movie of the past He could then go anywhere he wanted in the scene and see anything he chose. While he was gazing into the past, Ossowiecki even moved his eyes back and forth as if the things he was describing possessed an actual physical presence before him.
	He could see the vegetation, the people, and the dwellings inwhich they lived. On one occasion, after handling a stone implement from the Magdalenian culture, a Stone Age people who flourished in France about 15,000 to 10,000 B.C., Ossowiecki told Poniatowski that Mag- dalenian women had very complex hair styles. At the time this seemed absurd, but subsequent discoveries of statues of Magdalenian women with ornate coiffures proved Ossowiecki right.
	Over the course of the experiments Ossowiecki offered over one hundred such pieces of information, details about the past that at first seemed inaccurate, but later proved correct. He said that Stone Age peoples used oil lamps and was vindicated when excavations in Dordogne, France, uncovered oils lamps of the exact size and style he described. He made detailed drawings of the animals various peoples hunted, the style of the huts in which they lived, and their burial customs—assertions that were all later confirmed by archaeological discoveries.1
	Poniatowski's work with Ossowiecki is not unique. Norman Emer- son, a professor of anthropology at the University of Toronto and founding vice president of the Canadian Archaeological Association, has also investigated the use of clairvoyants in archaeological work. Emerson's research has centered around a truck driver named George McMullen. Like Ossowiecki, McMullen has the ability to psychometrize objects and use them to tune into scenes from the past. McMullen can also tune into the past simply by visiting an archaeological site. Once there, he paces back and forth until he gets his bearings. Then he begins to describe the people and culture that once flourished at the site. On one such occasion Emerson watched as McMullen bounded over a patch of bare ground, pacing out what he said was the location of an Iroquois longhouse. Emerson marked the area with survey pegs and six months later uncovered the ancient structure exactly where McMullen said it would be.2
	
229-230
	Time is not the only thing that is illusory in a holographic universe. Space, too, must be viewed as a product of our mode of perception. This is even more difficult to comprehend than the idea that time is a construct, for when it comes to trying to conceptualize "spaceless- ness" there are no easy analogies, no images of amoeboid universes or crystallizing futures, to fall back on. We are so conditioned to think in terms of space as an absolute that it is hard for us even to begin to imagine what it would be like to exist in a realm in which space did not exist. Nonetheless, there is evidence that we are ultimately no more bound by space than we are by time.
	One powerful indication that this is so can be found in out-of-body phenomena, experiences in which an individual's conscious awareness appears to detach itself from the physical body and travel to some other location. Out-of-body experiences, or OBEs, have been reported throughout history by individuals from all walks of life. Aldous Huxley, Goethe, D. H. Lawrence, August Strindberg, and Jack London all reported having OBEs. They were known to the Egyptians, the North American Indians, the Chinese, the Greek philosophers, the medieval alchemists, the Oceanic peoples, the Hindus, the Hebrews, and the Moslems. In a cross-cultural study of 44 non-Western societies, Dean Shie ls found that only three did not hold a belief in OBEs.'In a similar study anthropologist Erika Bourguignon looked at 488 world societies—or roughly 57 percent of all known societies—and found that 437 of them, or 89 percent, had at least some tradition regarding OBEs.2
	Even today studies indicate that OBEs are still widespread. The late Dr. Robert Crookall, a geologist at the University of Aberdeen and an amateur parapsychologist, investigated enough cases to fill nine books on the subject In the 1960s Celia Green, the director of the Institute of Psychophysical Research in Oxford, polled 115 students at Southampton University and found that 19percent admitted to having an OBE. When 380 Oxford students were similarly questioned, 34 per- cent answered in the affirmative.3 In a survey of 902 adults Haraldsson found that 8 percent had experienced being out of their bodies at least once in their life.4 And a 1980 survey conducted by Dr. Harvey Irwin at the University of New England in Australia revealed that 20 percent of 177 students had experienced an OBE.5 When averaged, these figures indicate that roughly one out of every five people will have an OBE at some point in his or her life. Other studies suggest the incidence may be closer to one in ten, but the fact remains: OBEs are far more common than most people realize.

231
	It is of no small significance that Gabbard, Twemlow,and Jones also studied the psychological profile of OBEers and found that they were psychologically normal and were on the whole extremely well ad- justed. At the 1980 meeting of the American Psychiatric Association they presented their conclusions and told their colleagues that reas- surances that OBEs are common occurrences and referring the pa- tient to books on the subject may be "more therapeutic" than psychiat- ric treatment. They even hinted that patients might gain more relief by talking to a yogi than to a psychiatrist!7

232
	Experiencing an OBE during cardiac arrest is relatively common, so common that Michael B. Sabom, a cardiologist and professor of medicine at Emory University and a staff physician at the Atlanta Veterans' Administration Medical Center, got tired of hearing his patients recount such "fantasies" and decided to settle the matter once and for all. Sabom selected two groups of patients, one composed of 32 sea- soned cardiac patients who had reported OBEs during their heart attacks, and one made up of 25 seasoned cardiac patients who had never experienced an OBE. He then interviewed the patients, asking
the OBEers to describe their own resuscitation as they had witnessed it from the out-of-body state, and asking the nonexperiencers to de- scribe what they imagined must have transpired during their resuscitation.
	Of the nonexperiencers, 20 made major mistakes when they de- scribed their resuscitations, 3 gave correct but general descriptions, and 2 had no idea at all what had taken place. Among the experiencers, 26 gave correct but general descriptions, 6 gave highly detailed and accurate descriptions of their own resuscitation, and 1 gave a blow-by- blow accounting so accurate that Sabom was stunned. The results inspired him to delve even deeper into the phenomenon, and like Clark, he has now become an ardent believer and lectures widely on the subject. There appears "to be no plausible explanation for the accu- racy of these observations involving the usual physical senses," he says."The out-of-body hypothesis simply seems to fit best with the data at hand."9

236-237
	There is evidence that even our physical senses have fallen victim to this censorship. Despite our unwavering conviction that we see with our eyes, reports persist of individuals who possess "eyeless sight," or the ability to see with other areas of their bodies. Recently David Eisenberg, M.D., a clinical research fellow at the Harvard Medical School, published an account of two school-age Chinese sisters in Beijing who can "see" well enough with the skin in their armpits to read notes and identify colors.17 In Italy the neurologist Cesare Lombroso studied a blind girl who could see with the tip of her nose and the lobe of her left ear.18 In the 1960s the prestigious Soviet Academy of Science investigated a Russian peasant woman named Rosa Kule- shova, who could see photographs and read newspapers with the tips of her fingers, and pronounced her abilities genuine. Significantly, the Soviets ruled out the possibility that Kuleshova was simply detecting the varying amounts of stored heat different colors emanate naturally—Kuleshova could read a black and white newspaper even when it was covered with a sheet of heated glass.19 Kuleshova became so renowned for her abilities that Life	magazine eventually published an article about her.20
	In short, there is evidence that we too are not limited to seeing only through our physical eyes. This is, of course, the message inherent in my father's friend Tom's ability to read the inscription on a watch even when it was shielded by his daughter's stomach, and also in the re- mote-viewing phenomenon. One cannot help but wonder if eyeless sight is actually just further evidence that reality is indeed maya, an illusion, and our physical body, as well as all the seeming absoluteness of its physiology, is as much a holographic construct of our perception as our second body. Perhaps we are so deeply habituated to believing that we can see only through our eyes that even in the physical we have shut ourselves off from the full range of our perceptual capabilities.

238-239
	Indeed, when one reads the voluminous literature now available on the OB phenomenon, one is repeatedly struck at the similarities be- tween OB travelers' descriptions of their experiences and characteristics we have now come to associate with a holographic universe. In addition to describing the OB state as a place where time and space no longer properly exist, where thought can be transformed into hologram like forms, and where consciousness is ultimately a pattern of vibrations, or frequencies, Monroe notes that perception during OBEs seems based less on "a reflection of light waves" and more on "an impression of radiation," an observation that suggests once again that when one enters the OB realm one begins to enter Pribram's frequency domain.25 Other OB travelers have also referred to the frequency like quality of the Second State. For instance, Marcel Louis Forhan, a French OB experiencer who wrote under the name of "Yram," spends much of his book, Practical Astral Projection, try- ing to describe the wavelike and seemingly electromagnetic qualities of the OB realm. Still others have commented on the sense of cosmic unity one experiences during the state and have summarized it as a feeling that "everything is everything," and "I am that."26
	As holographic as the OBE is, it is only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to more direct experience of the frequency aspects of reality. Although OBEs are only experienced by a segment of the human race, there is another circumstance under which we all come into closer contact with the frequency domain. That is when we journey to that undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveler returns. The rub, with all due respect to Shakespeare, is that some travelers do return. And the stories they tell are filled with features that smack once again of things holographic.

287-291
	For example, Bohm's idea that the universe can be viewed as the compound of two basic orders, the implicate and the explicate, can be found in many other traditions. The Tibetan Buddhists call these two aspects the void and nonvoid. The nonvoid is the reality of visible objects. The void, like the implicate order, is the birthplace of all things in the universe, which pour out of it in a "boundless flux. " However, only the void is real and all forms in the objective world are illusory, existing merely because of the unceasing flux between the two or- ders.1
	In turn, the void is described as "subtle," "indivisible," and "free from distinguishing characteristics. " Because it is seamless totality it cannot be described in words.2 Properly speaking, even the nonvoid cannot be described in words because it, too, is a totality in which consciousness and matter and all other things are indissoluble and whole. Herein lies a paradox, for despite its illusory nature the nonvoid still contains "an infinitely vast complex of universes." And yet its indivisible aspects are always present. As the Tibet scholar John Blofeld states, "In a universe thus composed,everything interpenetrates, and is interpenetrated by, everything else; as with the void, so with the non-void—the part is the whole."3
	The Tibetans prefigured some of Pribram's thinking as well. Accord- ing to Milarepa, an eleventh-century Tibetan yogin and the most renowned of the Tibetan Buddhist saints, the reason we are unable to perceive the void directly is because our unconscious mind (or, as Milarepa puts it, our "inner consciousness") is far too "conditioned" in its perceptions. This conditioning not only keeps us from seeing what he calls "the border between mind and matter, " or what we would call the frequency domain, but also causes us to form a body for ourselves when we are in the between-life state and no longer have a body. "In the invisible realm of the heavens... the illusory mind is the great culprit," writes Milarepa, who counseled his disciples to practice "perfect seeing and contemplation" in order to realize this "Ultimate Reality."4
	Zen Buddhists also recognize the ultimate indivisibility of reality, and indeed the main objective of Zen is to learn how to perceive this wholeness. In their book Games Zen Masters Play, and in words that could have been lifted right from one of Bohm's papers, Robert Sohl and Audrey Carr state, "To confuse the indivisible nature of reality with the conceptual pigeonholes of language is the basic ignorance from which Zen seeks to free us. The ultimate answers to existence are not to be found in intellectual concepts and philosophies, however sophisticated, but rather in a level of direct non conceptual experience [of reality]."5
	The Hindus call the implicate level of reality Brahman.6 Brahman is formless but is the birthplace of all forms in visible reality, which appear out of it and then enfold back into it in endless flux. 7 Like Bohm, who says that the implicate order can just as easily be called spirit, the Hindus sometimes personify this level of reality and say that it is composed of pure consciousness. Thus, consciousness is not only a subtler form of matter, but it is more fundamental than matter; and in the Hindu cosmogony it is matter that has emerged from consciousness, and not the other way around. Or as the Vedas put it, the physical world is brought into being through both the "veiling" and "projecting" powers of consciousness.8
Because the material universe is only a second-generation reality, a creation of veiled consciousness, the Hindus say that it is transitory and unreal, or maya. As the Svetasvatara Upanishad states, "One should know that Nature is illusion (maya), and that Brahman is the illusion maker. This whole world is pervaded with beings that are parts of him."9 Similarly, the Kena Upanishad says that Brahman is an uncanny something "which changes its form every moment from human shape to a blade of grass."10
	Because everything unfolds out of the irreducible totality of Brah- man, the world is also a seamless whole, say the Hindus, and it is again maya that keeps us from realizing there is ultimately no such thing as separateness. "Maya severs the united consciousness so that the object is seen as other than the self and then as split up into the multitudinous objects in the universe," says the Vedic scholar SirJohn Woodroffe. "And there is such objectivity as long as [humanity's] consciousness is veiled or contracted. But in the ultimate basis of experience the divergence has gone, for in it lie, in undifferentiated mass, experiencer, experience, and the experienced."11
	This same concept can be found in Judaic thought. According to Kabbalistic tradition "the entire creation is an illusory projection of the transcendental aspects of God, " says Leo Schaya, a Swiss expert on the Kabbalah. However, despite its illusory nature, it is not com- plete nothingness, "for every reflection of reality, even remote, broken up and transient, necessarily possesses something of its cause."12 The idea that the creation set into motion by the God of Genesis is an illusion is reflected even in the Hebrew language, for as the Zohar, a thirteenth-century Kabbalistic commentary on the Torah and the most famous of the esoteric Judaic texts, notes, the verb baro, "to create," implies the idea of "creating an illusion."i:i
There are many holographic concepts in shamanistic thinking as well. The Hawaiian kahunas say that everything in the universe is infinitely interconnected and that this interconnectivity can almost be thought of as a web. The shaman, recognizing the interconnectedness of all things, sees himself at the center of this web and thus capable of affecting every other part of the universe (it is interesting to note that the concept of maya is also frequently likened to a web in Hindu thought).14
Like Bohm, who says that consciousness always has its source in the implicate, the aborigines believe that the true source of the mind is in the transcendent reality of the dreamtime. Normal people do not realize this and believe that their consciousness is in their bodies. How- ever, shamans know this is not true, and that is why they are able to make contact with the subtler levels of reality.15
	The Dogon people of the Sudan also believe that the physical world is the product of a deeper and more fundamental level of reality and is perpetually flowing out of and then streaming back into this more primary aspect of existence. As one Dogon elder described it, "To draw up and then return what one had drawn—that is the life of the world. "16
	In fact, the implicate/explicate idea can be found in virtually all shamanic traditions. States Douglas Sharon in his book Wizard of the Four Winds: A Shaman's Story: "Probably the central concept of shamanism, wherever in the world it is found, is the notion that under- lying all the visible forms in the world, animate and inanimate, there exists a vital essence from which they emerge and by which they are nurtured. Ultimately everything returns to this ineffable, mysterious, impersonal unknown."17

The Candle and the Laser
	Certainly one of the most fascinating properties of a piece of holographic film is the nonlocal way an image is distributed in its surface.
	As we have seen, Bohm believes the universe itself is also organized in this manner and employs a thought experiment involving a fish and two television monitors to explain why he believes the universe is similarly nonlocal. Numerous ancient thinkers also appear to have recognized, or at least intuited, this aspect of reality. The twelfth- century Sufis summed it up by saying simply that "the macrocosm is the microcosm," a kind of earlier version of Blake's notion of seeing the world in a grain of sand.18 The Greek philosophers Anaximenes of Miletus, Pythagoras, Heraclitus, and Plato; the ancient Gnostics; the pre-Christian Jewish philosopher Philo Judaeus; and the medieval Jewish philosopher Maimonides—all embraced the macrocosm-microcosm idea.
	After a shamanic vision of the subtler levels of reality the semimythical ancient Egyptian prophet Hermes Trismegistus employed a slightly different phrasing and said that one of the main keys to knowl- edge was the understanding that "the without is like the within of things; the small is like the large."19 The medieval alchemists, for whom Hermes Trismegistus became a kind of patron saint, distilled the sentiment into the motto "As above, so below." In talking about the same macrocosm-equals-microcosm idea the Hindu Visvasara Tantra uses somewhat cruder terms and states simply, "What is here is elsewhere. "20
	The Oglala Sioux medicine man Black Elk put an even more nonlocal twist on the same concept. While standing on Harney Peak in the Black Hills he witnessed a "great vision" during which he "saw more than I can tell and I understood more than I saw; for I was seeing in a sacred manner the shapes of all things in the spirit, and the shape of all shapes as they must live together as one being. " One of the most profound understandings he came away with after this encounter with the ineffable was that Harney Peak was the center of the world. However, this distinction was not limited to Harney Peak, for as Black Elk put it, "Anywhere is the center of the world. "21 Over twenty-five centuries earlier the Greek philosopher Empedocles brushed up against the same sacred otherness and wrote that "God is a circle whose center is everywhere, and its circumference nowhere."22
	Not content with mere words, some ancient thinkers resorted to even more elaborate analogies in their attempt to communicate the holographic properties of reality. To this end the author of the Hindu Avatamsaka Sutra likened the universe to a legendary network of pearls said to hang over the palace of the god Indra and "so arranged that if you look at one [pearl], you see all the others reflect in it." As the author of the Sutra explained, "In the same way, each object in the world is not merely itself, but involves every other object and, in fact, is everything else."23
	Fa-Tsang, the seventh-century founder of the Hua-yen school of Buddhist thought, employed a remarkably similar analogy when try- ing to communicate the ultimate interconnectedness and interpenetra- tion of all things. Fa-Tsang, who held that the whole cosmos was implicit in each of its parts (and who also believed that every point in the cosmos was its center), likened the universe to a multidimensional network of jewels, each one reflecting all others ad infinitum.24
	When the empress Wu announced that she did not understand what Fa-Tsang meant by this image and asked him for further clarification, Fa-Tsang suspended a candle in the middle of a room full of mirrors. This, he told the empress Wu, represented the relationship of the One to the many. Then he took a polished crystal and placed it in the center of the room so that it reflected everything around it. This, he said, showed the relationship of the many to the One. However, like Bohm, who stresses that the universe is not simply a hologram but a holo- rnovement, Fa-Tsang stressed that his model was static and did not reflect the dynamism and constant movementof the cosmic interrelat- edness among all things in the universe.25
	In short, long before the invention of the hologram, numerous think- ers had already glimpsed the nonlocal organization of the universe and had arrived at their own unique ways to express this insight. It is worth noting that these attempts, crude as they may seem to those of us who are more technologically sophisticated, may have been far more important than we realize. For instance, it appears that the seventeenth-century German mathematician and philosopherLeibniz was familiar with the Hua-yen school of Buddhist thought. Some have argued that this was why he proposed that the universe is constituted out of fundamental entities he called "monads," each of which contains a reflection of the whole universe. What is significant is that Leibniz also gave the world integral calculus, and it was integral calculus that enabled Dennis Gabor to invent the hologram.

