Dion Fortune - Mystical Qabalah

Hod

16. We may ask ourselves, then, whether the gods are whole subjective; whether they live solely in the imaginations of their worshippers, or whether they have an independent life of their own? The answer to this question is to be found in a fact of occult experience which cannot be explained by what we know of natural science, but which has to be taken for granted by every practical occultist before he can obtain results. In fact, one might say that the results he obtains are in proportion to his faith, for it becomes true for him as soon as he believes in it. This fact is, that only a very small pro-portion of the existing mind-stuff of the universe whatever that may be, is organised into the brains and nervous systems of Sentient creatures. The vast mass of what, for want of a better name, we call mind-stuff, because that is its nearest analogy among known things, is freemoving upon what occultists call the astral plane, organised into forms within itself, but not necessarily attached to matter. Different occultists refer to this free mind-stuff by different names. Mme Blavatsky calls it Akasha; Eliphas Levi calls it the reflecting ether. Netzach represents the force aspect, and Hod the form aspect of this Akasha. 
17. Out of this mind-stuff are formed the moulds of all forms; and within these moulds are built up the framework of  etheric stresses that function in the sphere of Yesod, and within which are held the molecules of matter which form the body of manifestation on the physical plane. 
18. Normally these forms are built by the cosmic consciousness expressed as natural forces, functioning each according to its nature; but as consciousness began to develop in the creatures of the Creator, it exercised its function in varying degrees upon the astral mind-stuff which, by its nature, was amenable to the influences of consciousness; consequently, "the thought of man made Gods to love and honour." These forms, once built, became channels of the specialised forces they were designed to represent, concentrating them upon their worshippers. In this enlightened sense initiates not only believe in, but adore the gods. 

Mystical Qabala Page 150 

NETZACH 

1. Netzach, the Sphere of Venus, is best understood by contrasting it with Hod, the Sphere of Mercury, these two repre-senting force and form on a lower arc, as has already been seen. Netzach represents the instincts and the emotions they give rise to, and Hod represents the concrete mind. In the macro cosm they represent two levels of the process of the con cretion of force into form. In Netzach force is still relatively free-moving, being bound only into exceedingly fluidic and ever-shifting shapes, and in Hod taking on for the first time definite and permanent form, though of an exceedingly tenuous nature. In Netzach a particular form of force represents itself as a type of beings, flowing backwards and forwards over the boundaries of manifestation in an exceedingly elusive manner. Such beings have no individualised personalities, but are like the armies with banners that can be seen in the sunset clouds. In Hod, however, individualisation into units has taken place, and there is continuity of existence. All mind is group-mind in Netzach, but in Hod the human mind has its beginnings. 
2. Let us now consider Netzach itself, both in its microcosmic and macrocosmic aspects, bearing constantly in mind that we are now in the sphere of illusion, and that what is about to be described in terms of form are appearances as represented by the intellect to itself and projected back into the astral light as thought-forms. This is a very important point, and should be thoroughly understood in order to avoid falling into superstition. Everything that is perceived by the "eyes of the intellect and the contemplations of faith," as the Yetziratic Text so graphically puts it, has its metaphysical basis in Chokmah, the Supernal Sephirah at the head of the Pillar of Mercy. But with Netzach a great change comes over our mode of apprehending the different types of existence assigned to each sphere. Hitherto we have perceived by means of intuition; our apprehensions have been formless, or at least represented by highly abstract symbols; there are no more of these after Tiphareth, but we come to such concrete symbols as the rose, assigned to Venus, for Netzach, and the caduceus, assigned to Mercury, for Hod. 
3. As has been seen, we conceive of the higher Sephiroth under the aspect of factors of martifestation and functionS. We saw in our study of Tiphareth how the Mediating Intelligence, as the Sepher Yetzirah calls it, broke up the White Light of the One Life as in a prism so that it becomes the Refulgent Splendour of many-rayed hues in Netzach. Here we have not force, but forces; not life, but lives. Appropriately, therefore, the Order of Angels assigned to Netzach are the Flohim, or gods. The One has been reduced to the Many for the purposes of manifestation in form. 
4. These rays are not represented as the pure white light by which we see everything in its true colours, but as many-hued, each one of which brings out and intensifies some specialised aspect of manifestation, just as a ray of blue light will only show up those colours that are sympathetic to it, and will make its complementary colours look black. Every life or form of force manifesting in Netzach is a partial but specialised manifestation; therefore no being that has for its sphere of evolution the sphere of Netzach can ever have an all-round development, but must always be a creature of one idea, one single, simple, stereotyped function. 
5. It is the Netzach factor in ourselves that is the basis of our instincts, each of which, in their unintellectualised essence, gives rises to appropriate reflexes, just as an infant's lips will suck anything that is inserted between them. 
6. The beings of Netzach, the Elohim, are not so much intelligences as the embodiments of ideas. 
7. These Elohim, to give them their Hebrew name, are the formative influences whereby the creative force expresses itself in Nature. Their true character is to be discerned in Chesed, where they are described by the Sepher Yetzirah as the Holy Powers." In Netzach, however, which represents the upper stratum of the reflecting ether, they undergo a change, the image-making mind of man has begun to work upon them, moulding the astral light into forms that shall represent them to his consciousness. 
8. It is very important that we should realise that these lower Sephiroth of the Plane of Illusion are densely populated by thought-forms; that everything which the human imagination has been able to conceive, however dimly, has a form built about it out of the astral light, and that the more the human imagination has dwelt upon it to idealise it, the more definite that form becomes. Consequently, subsequent generations of seers, when they seek to discern the spiritual nature and inner most essence of any form of life, are met by these images, the creations of the created," and will be deceived therehy, mistaking them for the abstract essence itself, which is not to be found upon any plane that yields images to psychic vision, but only upon those that are discerned by pure intuition. 
9. When his mentality was still primitive man worshipped these images, by means of which he represented to himself the great natural forces so all-important to his material well~heing, thus establishing a link with them, by means of which a channel was developed whereby the forces they represented were poured into his soul, thus stimulating the corresponding factor in his own nature and thereby developing it. The operations of this worship, especially when it became highly organised and intellectualised, as in Greece and Egypt, built up exceedingly definite and potent images, and it is these that are generally understood as the gods. Generations of worship and adoration kuild a very strong image in the astral light, and when sacrifice is added to worship, the image is brought a step farther down the planes into manifestation and acquires a form in the der:se ethers of Yesod, and is a very potent magical object, capable of independent action when ensouled by the concrete ideas generated in Hod. 
10. We see, then, that every celestial being conceived by the mind of man has as its basis a natural force, but that upon the basis of this natural force is built up a symbolic image representative thereof, which is ensouled and rendered active by the force it represents. The image, then, is but a mode of representation indulged in by the human mind for its own convenience, but the force that the image represents, and which ensouls it, is a very real thing indeed, and under certain circumstances can be exceedingly powerful. In other words, although the form under which the god is represented is pure imagination, the force associated with it is both real and active. 
11. This fact is the key, not only to talismanic magic in its broadest sense, which includes all consecrated objects used in ceremonial and for meditation, but to many things in life that we cannot fail to observe but forwhichwe have no explanation. It explains a great many things in organised religion that are very real to the believer but very baffling to the unbeliever, who can neither explain them nor explain them away. 
12. In Netzach, however, we have the most tenuous form of these things, and they are perceived far more by the "contemplations of faith" than by the "eyes of the intellect." In the Sphere of Hod are performed all manner of magical operations in which the intellect itself is brought to bear upon these tenuous and fleeting images to give them form and permanency; but in the Sphere of Netzach such operations do not take place to any great degree; all god-forms in Netzach are worshipped by means of the arts, not conceived by means of philosophies. Nevertheless, for all practical purposes it is impossible to separate the activities of Hod and Netzach, which are a functional pair, just as Geburah and Chesed make up the two aspects of metabolism, the katabolic and the anabolic. The functions of Netzach are implicit in Hod because Netzach emanates Hod, and the powers developed by evolution in the Sphere of Netzach are the basis of the capacities of Hod. Consequently all magical operations of the Sphere of Hod work upon a basis of the tenuous life-forms of Netzach; and because the human intellect works up from Sphere to Sphere, a good deal of the powers of Hod have been carried over into Netzach by initiated souls going on ahead of evolution. The two Spheres, therefore, are not clear-cut in their division and classification, but in each one a certain type of function very definitely predominates. 

13. The contacts of Netzach are not made by means of conceiving its life philosophically, nor by means of ordinary image-making psychism, but by "feeling with," as Algernon Blackwood has so graphically expressed it in his novels, into [Page 226] which so much of the Sphere of Netzach enters. It is by means of dance and sound and colour that the Netzach angels are contacted and evoked. The worshipper of a god in the Sphere of Netzach enters into communion with the object of his adoration by means of the arts; and in proportion as he is an artist in some medium or other, and can therein represent his deity symbolically, will he be able to make the contact and draw the life into himself. All rites which have rhythm and movement and colour in them are aworking in the Sphere of Netzach. And as Hod, the Sphere of magical workings, draws its force from Netzach, it follows that any magical operation of the Sphere of Hod must have a Netzach element in it if it is to be ensouled effectually; and in order to provide a basis of Mystical Qabala Page 154 manifestation, etheric substance has to be provided by some form of sacrifice, even if it he only the burning of incense. This question will be dealt with fully in studying the Sphere of Yesod, to which it belongs. It is necessary to refer to it here, because the significance of the rites of Netzach cannot be understood without a realisation of the means whereby manifestation is effected, and the god brought near to his worshippers. 




