Tao of Physics 

Chapter 10

In ordinary life, we are not aware of this unity of all things, but divide the world into separate objects and events. This division is, of course, useful and necessary to cope with our everyday environment, but it is not a fundamental feature of reality. It is an abstraction devised by our discriminating and categorizing intellect. To believe that our abstract concepts of separate ‘things’ and ‘events’ are realities of nature is an illusion. Hindus and Buddhists tell us that this illusion is based on avidya, or ignorance, produced by a mind under the spell of maya. The principal aim of the Eastern mystical traditions is therefore to readjust the mind by centering and quietening it through meditation. The Sanskrit term for meditation samadhi- means literally ‘mental equilibrium’. It refers to the balanced and tranquil state of mind in which the basic unity of the universe is experienced:
Entering into the samadhi of purity, (one obtains) all penetrating insight that enables one to become conscious of the absolute oneness of the universe.*
The basic oneness of the universe is not only the central characteristic of the mystical experience, but is also one of the most important revelations of modern physics. It becomes apparent at the atomic level and manifests itself more and more as one penetrates deeper into matter, down into the realm of subatomic particles. The unity of all things and events will be a recurring theme throughout our comparison of modern physics and Eastern philosophy. As we study the various models of subatomic physics we shall see that they express again and again, in different ways, the same insight that the constituents of matter and the basic phenomena involving them are all interconnected, interrelated and interdependent; that they cannot be understood as isolated entities, but only as integrated parts of the whole.
In this chapter, I shall discuss how the notion of the basic interconnectedness of nature arises in quantum theory, the theory of atomic phenomena, through a careful analysis of Physics the process of observation.* Before entering this discussion, I haveto come back to thedistinction between the mathematical framework of a theory and its verbal interpretation. The mathematical framework of quantum theory has passed countless successful tests and is now universally accepted as a consistent and accurate description of all atomic phenomena. The verbal interpretation, on the other hand-i.e. the metaphysics of quantum theory-is on far less solid ground. In fact, in more than forty years physicists have not been able to provide a clear metaphysical model.
The following discussion is based on the so-called Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory which was developed by Bohr and Heisenberg in the late 1920s and is still the most widely accepted model. In my discussion I shall follow the presentation given by Henry Stapp of the University of California which concentrates on certain aspects of the theory and on a certain type of experimental situation that is frequently encountered in subatomic physics.** Stapp’s presentation shows most clearly how quantum theory implies an essential interconnectedness of nature, and it also puts the theory in a framework that can readily be extended to the relativistic models of subatomic particles to be discussed later on. 
The starting point of the Copenhagen interpretation is the division of the physical world into an observed system (‘object’) and an observing system. The observed system can be an atom, a subatomic particle, an atomic process, etc. The observing system consists of the experimental apparatus and will include one or several human observers. A serious difficulty now arises from the fact that the two systems are treated in different ways. The observing system is described in the terms of classical physics, but these terms cannot be used consistently for the description of the observed ‘object’. We know that classical concepts are inadequate at the atomic level, yet we have to use them to describe our experiments and to state the results. There is no way we can escape this paradox. The technical language of classical physics is just a refinement of our everyday language and it is the only language we have to communicate our experimental results. 
The observed systems are described in quantum theory in terms of probabilities. This means that we can never predict with certainty where a subatomic particle will be at a certain time, or how an atomic process will occur. All we can do is predict the odds. For example, most of the subatomic particles known today are unstable, that is, they distintegrate-or ‘decay’-into other particles after a certain time. It is not possible, however, to predict this time exactly. We can only predict the probability of decay after a certain time or, in other words, the average lifetime of a great number of particles of the same kind. The same applies to the ‘mode’ of decay. In general, an unstable particle can decay into various combinations of other particles, and again we cannot predict which combination a particular particle will choose. All we can predict is that out of a large number of particles 60 per cent, say, will decay in one way, 30 per cent in another way, and 10 per cent in a third way. It is clear that such statistical predictions need many measurements to be verified. Indeed, in the collision experiments of high-energy physics tens of thousands of particle collisions are recorded and analysed to determine the probability for a particular process.
…
At the atomic level, then, the solid material objects of classical physics dissolve into patterns of probabilities, and these patterns do not represent probabilities of things, but rather probabilities of interconnections. Quantum theory forces us to see the universe not as a collection of physical objects, but rather as a complicated web of relations between the various parts of a unified whole. This, however, is the way in which Eastern mystics have experienced the world, and some of them have expressed their experience in words which are almost identical with those used by atomic physicists. Here are two examples:
The material object becomes . . . something different from what we now see, not a separate object on the background or in the environment of the rest of nature but an indivisible part and even in a subtle way an expression of the unity of all that we see.’
Things derive their being and nature by mutual dependence and are nothing in themselves.
If these statements could be taken as an account of how nature appears in atomic physics, the following two statements from atomic physicists could, in turn, be read as a description of the mystical experience of nature:
An elementary particle is not an independently existing unanalyzable entity. It is, in essence, a set of relationships that reach outward to other things?
The world thus appears as a complicated tissue of events, in which connections of different kinds alternate or overlap or combine and thereby determine the texture of the whole. 
The picture of an interconnected cosmic web which emerges from modern atomic physics has been used extensively in the East to convey the mystical experience of nature. For the Hindus, Brahman is the unifying thread in the cosmic web, the ultimate ground of all being: 
He on whom the sky, the earth, and the atmosphere Are woven, and the wind, together with all life-breaths, Him alone know as the one SOUL
…
John Wheeler sees this involvement of the observer as the most important feature of quantum theory and he has therefore suggested replacing the word ‘observer’ by the word ‘participator’. In Wheeler’s own words, 
Nothing is more important about the quantum principle than this, that it destroys the concept of the world as ‘sitting out there’, with the observer safely separated from it by a 20 centimeter slab of plate glass. Even to observe so miniscule an object as an electron, he must shatter the glass. He must reach in. He must install his chosen measuring equipment. It is up to him to decide whether he shall measure position or momentum. To install the equipment to measure the one prevents and excludes his installing the equipment to measure the other. Moreover, the measurement changes the state of the electron. The universe will never afterwards be the same. To describe what has happened, one has to cross out that old word ‘observer’ and put in its place the new word ‘participator’. In some strange sense the universe is a participatory universe. 14 
The idea of ‘participation instead of observation’ has been formulated in modern physics only recently, but it is an idea which is well known to any student of mysticism. Mystical knowledge can never be obtained just by observation, but only by full participation with one’s whole being. The notion of the participator is thus crucial to the Eastern world view, and the Eastern mystics have pushed this notion to the extreme, to a point where observer and observed, subject and object, are not only inseparable but also become indistinguishable. The mystics are not satisfied with a situation analogous to atomic physics, where the observer and the observed cannot be separated, but can still be distinguished. They go much further, and in deep meditation they arrive at a point where the distinction between observer and observed breaks down completely, where subject and object fuse into a unified undifferentiated whole. Thus the Upanishads say, 
Where there is a duality, as it were, there one sees another; there one smells another; there one tastes another . . . But where everything has become just one’s own self, then whereby and whom would one see? then whereby and whom would one smell? then whereby and whom would one taste?l5
This, then, is the final apprehension of the unity of all things. It is reached- so the mystics tell us-in a state of consciousness where one’s individuality dissolves into an undifferentiated oneness, where the world of the senses is transcended and the notion of ‘things’ is left behind. In the words of Chuang Tzu,
My connection with the body and its parts is dissolved. My perceptive organs are discarded. Thus leaving my material form and bidding farewell to my knowledge, I become one with the Great Pervader. This I call sitting and forgetting all things.‘
Modern physics, of course, works in a very different framework and cannot go that far in the experience of the unity of all things. But it has made a great step towards the world view of the Eastern mystics in atomic theory. Quantum theory has abolished the notion of fundamentally separated objects, has introduced the concept of the participator to replace that of the observer, and may even find it necessary to include the human consciousness in its description of the world.* It has come to see the universe as an interconnected web of physical and mental relations whose parts are only defined through their connections to the whole. To summarize the world view *This point will be discussed further in Chapter 18. emerging from atomic physics, the words of a Tantric Buddhist, Lama Anagarika Govinda, seem to be perfectly apropos:
The Buddhist does not believe in an independent or separately existing external world, into whose dynamic forces he could insert himself. The external world and his inner world are for him only two sides of the same fabric, in which the threads of all forces and of all events, of all forms of consciousness and of their objects, are woven into an inseparable net of endless, mutually conditioned relations.
Chapter 11
The phenomenon of waves is encountered in many different contexts throughout physics and can be described with the same mathematical formalism whenever it occurs. The same mathematical forms are used to describe a light wave, a vibrating guitar string, a sound wave, or a water wave. In quantum theory, these forms are used again to describe the waves associated with particles. This time, however, the waves are much more abstract. They are closely related to the statistical nature of quantum theory, i.e. to the fact that atomic phenomena can only be described in terms of probabilities. The information about the probabilities for a particle is contained in a quantity called the probability function, and the mathematical form of this quantity is that of a wave, that is to say, it is similar to the forms used for the description of other types of waves. The waves associated with particles, however, are not ‘real’ three-dimensional waves, like water waves or sound waves, but are ‘probability waves’; abstract mathematical quantities which are related to the probabilities of finding the particles in various places and with various properties.
The introduction of probability waves, in a sense, resolves the paradox of particles being waves by putting it in a totally new context; but at the same time it leads to another pair of opposite concepts which is even more fundamental, that of existence and non-existence. This pair of opposites, too, is transcended by the atomic reality. We can never say that an atomic particle exists at a certain place, nor can we say that it does not exist. Being a probability pattern, the particle has tendencies to exist in various places and thus manifests a strange kind of physical reality between existence and non-existence. We cannot, therefore, describe the state of the particle in terms of fixed opposite concepts. The particle is not present at a definite place, nor is it absent. It does not change its position, nor does it remain at rest. What changes is the probability pattern, and thus the tendencies of the particle to exist in certain places. In the words of Robert Oppenheimer, 
If we ask, for instance, whether the position of the electron remains the same, we must say ‘no’; if we ask whether the electron’s position changes with time, we must say ‘no’; if we ask whether the electron is at rest, we must say ‘no’; if we ask whether it is in motion, we must say ‘no’.’
The reality of the atomic physicist, like the reality of the Eastern mystic, transcends the narrow framework of opposite concepts. Oppenheimer’s words thus seem to echo the words of the Upanishads,
It moves. It moves not. It is far, and It is near. It is within all this, And It is outside of all this.
Force and matter, particles and waves, motion and rest, existence and non-existence-these are some of the opposite or contradictory concepts which are transcended in modern physics. Of all these opposite pairs, the last seems to be the most fundamental, and yet, in atomic physics we have to go even beyond the concepts of existence and non-existence. This is the feature of quantum theory which is most difficult to accept and which lies at the heart of the continuing discussion about its interpretation. At the same time, the transcending of the concepts of existence and non-existence is also one of the most puzzling aspects of Eastern mysticism. Like the atomic physicists, the Eastern mystics deal with a reality which lies beyond existence and non-existence, and they frequently emphasize this important fact. Thus Ashvaghosha: 
Suchness is neither that which is existence, nor that which is non-existence, nor that which is at once existence and non-existence, nor that which is not at once existence and non-existence.
Faced with a reality which lies beyond opposite concepts, physicists and mystics have to adopt a special way of thinking, where the mind is not fixed in the rigid framework of classical logic, but keeps moving and changing its viewpoint. In atomic physics, for example, we are now used to applying both the particle and the wave concept in our description of matter. We have learned how to play with the two pictures, switching from one to the other and back, in order to cope with the atomic reality. This is precisely the way in which the Eastern mystics think when they try to interpret their experience of a reality beyond opposites. In the words of Lama Govinda, The Eastern way of thinking rather consists in a circling round the object of contemplation . . . a many-sided, i.e. multi-dimensional impression formed from the superimposition of single impressions from different points of view.‘
…
This notion of complementarity has become an essential part of the way physicists think about nature and Bohr has often suggested that it might be a useful concept also outside the field of physics; in fact, the notion of complementarity proved to be extremely useful 2,500 years ago. It played an essential role in ancient Chinese thought which was based on the insight that opposite concepts stand in a polar-or complementary-relationship to each other. The Chinese sages represented this complementarity of opposites by the archetypal poles yin and yang and saw their dynamic interplay as the essence of all natural phenomena and all human situations. Niels Bohr was well aware of the parallel between his concept of complementarity and Chinese thought. When he visited China in 1937, at a time when his interpretation of quantum theory had already been fully elaborated, he was deeply impressed by the ancient Chinese notion of polar opposites, and from that time he maintained an interest in Eastern culture. Ten years later, Bohr was knighted as an acknowledgment of his outstanding achievements in science and important contributions to Danish cultural life; and when he had to choose a suitable motif for his coat-of-arms his choice fell on the Chinese symbol of t’ai-chi representing the complementary relationship of the archetypal opposites yin and yang. In choosing this symbol for his coat-of-arms together with the inscription Contraria sunt complementa (Opposites are complementary), Niels Bohr acknowledged the profound harmony between ancient Eastern wisdom and modern Western science.
Chapter 12
Classical physics was based on the notion both of an absolute, three-dimensional space, independent of the material objects it contains, and obeying the laws of Euclidean geometry, and of time as a separate dimension which again is absolute and flows at an even rate, independent of the material world. In the West, these notions of space and time were so deeply rooted in the minds of philosophers and scientists that they were taken as true and unquestioned properties of nature.
The belief that geometry is inherent in nature, rather than part of the framework we use to describe nature, has its origin in Greek thought. Demonstrative geometry was the central feature of Greek mathematics and had a profound influence on Creek philosophy. Its method of starting from unquestioned axioms, and deriving theorems from these by deductive reasoning, became characteristic of Creek philosophical thought; geometry was therefore at the very centre of all intellectual activities and formed the basis of philosophical training. The gate of Plato’s Academy in Athens is said to have borne the inscription, ‘You are not allowed to enter here, unless you know geometry.’ The Greeks believed that their mathematical theorems were expressions of eternal and exact truths about the real world, and that geometrical shapes were manifestations of absolute beauty. Geometry was considered to be the perfect combination of logic and beauty and was thus believed to be of divine origin. Hence Plato’s dictum, ‘God is a geometer.’
Since geometry was seen as the revelation of God, it was obvious to the Creeks that the heavens should exhibit perfect geometrical shapes. This meant that the heavenly bodies had to move in circles. To present the picture as being even more geometrical they were thought to be fixed to a series of concentric crystalline spheres urhich moved as a whole, with the Earth at the centre.
In subsequent centuries, Greek geometry continued to exert a strong influence on Western philosophy and science. Euclid’s Elements was a standard textbook in European schools until the beginning of this century, and Euclidean geometry was taken to be the true nature of space for more than two thousand years. It took an Einstein to make scientists and philosophers realize that geometry is not inherent in nature, but is imposed upon it by the mind. In the words of Henry Margenau, The central recognition of the theory of relativity is that geometry . . . is a construct of the intellect. Only when this discovery is accepted can the mind feel free to tamper with the time-honoured notions of space and time, to survey the range of possibilities available for defining them, and to select that formulation which agrees with observation.’
Eastern philosophy, unlike that of the Greeks, has always maintained that space and time are constructs of the mind. The Eastern mystics treated them like all other intellectual concepts; as relative, limited, and illusory. In a Buddhist text, for example, we find the words, It was taught by the Buddha, oh Monks, that . . . the past, the future, physical space, . . . and individuals are nothing but names, forms of thought, words of common usage, merely superficial realities
Thus in the Far East, geometry never attained the status it had in ancient Greece, although this does not mean that the Indians and Chinese had little knowledge of it. They used it extensively in building altars of precise geometrical shapes, in measuring the land and mapping out the heavens, but never to determine abstract and eternal truths. This philosophical attitude is also reflected in the fact that ancient Eastern science generally did not find it necessary to fit nature into a scheme of straight lines and perfect circles. Joseph Needham’s remarks about Chinese astronomy are very interesting in this connection
The Chinese [astronomers] did not feel the need for [geometricall forms of explanation-the component organisms in the universal organism followed their Tao each according to its own nature, and their motions could be dealt with in the essentially ‘non-representational’ form of algebra. The Chinese were thus free from that obsession of European astronomers for the circle as the most perfect figure, . . . nor did they experience the medieval prison of the crystalline spheres
Thus the ancient Eastern philosophers and scientists already had the attitude which is so basic to relativity theory-that our notions of geometry are not absolute and unchangeable properties of nature, but intellectual constructions. In the words of Ashvaghosha,
 Be it clearly understood that space is nothing but a mode of particularisation and that it has no real existence of its own . . . Space exists only in relation to our particularising consciousness.
The same applies to our idea of time. The Eastern mystics link the notions of both space and time to particular states of consciousness. Being able to go beyond the ordinary state through meditation, they have realized that the conventional notions of space and time are not the ultimate truth. The refined notions of space and time resulting from their mystical experiences appear to be in many ways similar to the notions of modern physics, as exemplified by the theory of relativity. What, then, is this new view of space and time which emerged from relativity theory? It is based on the discovery that all space and time measurements are relative. The relativity of spatial specifications was, of course, nothing new. It was well known before Einstein that the position of an object in space can only be defined relative to some other object. This is usually done with the help of three coordinates and the point from which the coordinates are measured may be called the location of the ‘observer’.
…
Many of the Eastern teachers emphasize that thought must take place in time, but that vision can transcend it. ‘Vision’, says Govinda, ‘is bound up with a space of a higher dimension, and therefore timeless.‘15 The space-time of relativistic physics is a similar timeless space of a higher dimension. All events in it are interconnected, but the connections are not causal.
Particle interactions can be interpreted in terms of cause and effect only when the space-time diagrams are read in a definite direction, e.g. from the bottom to the top. When they are taken as four-dimensional patterns without any definite direction of time attached to them, there is no ‘before’ and no ‘after’, and thus no causation.
Similarly, the Eastern mystics assert that in transcending time, they also transcend the world of cause and effect. Like our ordinary notions of space and time, causation is an idea which is limited to a certain experience of the world and has to be abandoned when this experience is extended. In the words of Swami Vivekananda,
Time, space, and causation are like the glass through which the Absolute is seen . . . In the Absolute there is neither time, space, nor causation.
The Eastern spiritual traditions show their followers various ways of going beyond the ordinary experience of time and of freeing themselves from the chain of cause and effect-from the bondage of karma, as the Hindus and Buddhists say. It has therefore been said that Eastern mysticism is a liberation from time. in a way, the same may be said of relativistic physics.
Chapter 15  The Cosmic Dance
For the modern physicists, then, Shiva’s dance is the dance of subatomic matter. As in Hindu mythology, it is a continual dance of creation and destruction involving the whole cosmos; the basis of all existence and of all natural phenomena. Hundreds of years ago, Indian artists created visual images of dancing Shivas in a beautiful series of bronzes. In our time, physicists have used the most advanced technology to portray the patterns of the cosmic dance. The bubble-chamber photographs of interacting particles, which bear testimony to the continual rhythm of creation and destruction in the universe, are visual images of the dance of Shiva equalling those of the Indian artists in beauty and profound significance. The metaphor of the cosmic dance thus unifies ancient mythology, religious art, and modern physics. It is indeed, as Coomaraswamy has said, ‘poetry, but none the less science’.
Chapter 16
The discovery of symmetric patterns in the particle world has led many physicists to believe that these patterns reflect the fundamental laws of nature. During the past fifteen years, a great deal of effort has been devoted to the search for an ultimate ‘fundamental symmetry’ that would incorporate all known particles and thus ‘explain’ the structure of matter. This aim reflects a philosophical attitude which has been inherited from the ancient Greeks and cultivated throughout many centuries. Symmetry, together with geometry, played an important role in Greek science, philosophy and art, where it was identified with beauty, harmony and perfection. Thus the Pythagoreans regarded symmetric number patterns as the essence of all things; Plato believed that the atoms of the four elements had the shapes of regular solids, and most Greek astronomers thought that the heavenly bodies moved in circles because the circle was the geometrical figure with the highest degree of symmetry.
The attitude of Eastern philosophy with regard to symmetry is in striking contrast to that of the ancient Greeks. Mystical traditions in the Far East frequently use symmetric patterns as symbols or as meditation devices, but the concept of symmetry does not seem to play any major role in their philosophy. Like geometry, it is thought to be a construct of the mind, rather than a property of nature, and thus of no fundamental importance. Accordingly, many Eastern art forms have a striking predilection for asymmetry and often avoid all regular or geometrical shapes. The Zen- inspired paintings of China and Japan, often executed in the so-called ‘one-corner’ style, or the irregular arrangements of flagstones in Japanese gardens clearly illustrate this aspect of Far-Eastern culture. It would seem, then, that the search for fundamental symmetries in particle physics is part of our Hellenic heritage which is, somehow, inconsistent with the general world view that begins to emerge from modern science. The emphasis on symmetry, however, is not the only aspect of particle physics.
In contrast to the ‘static’ symmetry approach, there has always been a ‘dynamic’ school of thought which does not regard the particle patterns as fundamental features of nature, but attempts to understand them as a consequence of the dynamic nature and essential interrelation of the subatomic world. The remaining two chapters show how this school of thought has given rise, in the past decade, to a radically different view of symmetries and laws of nature which is in harmony with the world view of modern physics described so far and which is in Quark perfect agreement with Eastern philosophy.
Epilouge
The parallels between the views of physicists and mystics become even more plausible when we recall the other similarities which exist in spite of their different approaches. To begin with, their method is thoroughly empirical. Physicists derive their knowledge from experiments; mystics from meditative insights. Both are observations, and in both fields these observations are acknowledged as the only source of knowledge. The object of observation is of course very different in the two cases. The mystic looks within and explores his or her consciousness at its various levels, which include the body as the physical manifestation of the mind. The experience of one’s body is, in fact, emphasized in many Eastern traditions and is often seen as the key to the mystical experience of the world. When we are healthy, we do not feel any separate parts in our body but are aware of it as an integrated whole, and this awareness generates a feeling of well-being and happiness. In a similar way, the mystic is aware of the wholeness of the entire cosmos which is experienced as an extension of the body. In the words of Lama Covinda, To the enlightened man . . . whose consciousness embraces the universe, to him the universe becomes his ‘body’, while his physical body becomes a manifestation of the Universal Mind, his inner vision an expression of the highest reality, and his speech an expression of eternal truth and mantric power.’
In contrast to the mystic, the physicist begins his enquiry into the essential nature of things by studying the material world. Penetrating into ever deeper realms of matter, he has become aware of the essential unity of all things and events. More than that, he has also learnt that he himself and his consciousness are an integral part of this unity. Thus the mystic and the physicist arrive at the same conclusion; one starting from the inner realm, the other from the outer world. The harmony between their views confirms the ancient Indian wisdom that Brahman, the ultimate reality without, is identical to Atman, the reality within. A further similarity between the ways of the physicist and mystic is the fact that their observations take place in realms which are inaccessible to the ordinary senses. In modern physics, these are the realms of the atomic and subatomic world; in mysticism they are non-ordinary states of consciousness in which the sense world is transcended. Mystics often talk about experiencing higher dimensions in which impressions of different centres of consciousness are integrated into a harmonious whole. A similar situation exists in modern physics where a four-dimensional ‘space-time’ formalism has been developed which unifies concepts and observations belonging to different categories in the ordinary three-dimensional world. In both fields, the multi-dimensional experiences transcend the sensory world and are therefore almost impossible to express in ordinary language.
We see that the ways of the modern physicist and the Eastern mystic, which seem at first totally unrelated, have, in fact, much in common. It should not be too surprising, therefore, that there are striking parallels in their descriptions of the world. Once these parallels between Western science and Eastern mysticism are accepted, a number of questions will arise concerning their implications. Is modern science, with all its sophisticated machinery, merely rediscovering ancient wisdom, known to the Eastern sages for thousands of years?
