7.1 Introduction
	We have seen earlier that nonlocality is a basically new feature of the quantum theory, at least in our interpretation. In this chapter we shall go into this topic in more detail, especially with regard to the analysis of the experiment of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen (EPR) [1].
	We shall first review briefly how this question is to be treated in terms of the various interpretations, and we shall show that all but one of them imply some form of nonlocality. However, it has generally been felt that the very concept of nonlocality is unacceptable in a scientific theory and so people have sought an explanation of this behaviour in terms of local hidden variables that would in principle determine the results of each measurement. This leads us then to give a brief discussion of Bell’s inequality [2] (which has to be satisfied by any such explanation), and also of the fact that Bell’s inequality is not actually satisfied, either by the predictions of the quantum theory or by the experiments that have been done to test this point.
	We then go on to discuss how our own interpretation deals consistently with these questions by bringing in a nonlocal connection through the quantum potential. We finally explain the fact that nonlocality is not commonly encountered at the large scale level by showing that it is generally difficult to maintain the wave functions that are needed for this except for certain systems at low temperatures (such as superconductors) and highly isolated systems that have to be produced in a rather artificial way.

7.2 Nonlocality in the conventional interpretations
	Nonlocality is usually discussed in terms of the EPR experiment. However, EPR emphasised not only the question of nonlocality, but also that of whether the quantum mechanics was what they called complete. By this they did not mean that it should cover everything that could ever be known, but rather that it had all the concepts necessary for its coherence as the basis of an ontology. The result of their analysis was that it was not complete in this sense. We shall give here a brief résumé of their analysis as it would apply to a spin experiment involving a molecule of total spin zero, each of whose atoms have a spin of one-half [3].
	Their discussion was based essentially on what they meant by an element of reality. In general terms this signified some feature of the world that is real, independently of its being observed or otherwise known by us. In particular they proposed a sufficient criterion for such an element of reality: if, without disturbing the system in any way, one can predict the values of a given quantity with certainty, i.e. with probability equal to unity, then that quantity corresponds to an element of reality. Clearly this fits in with our general intuitive notions of what is to be meant by an independently existent element of reality.
	We now consider an experiment in which the molecule is disintegrated so that the atoms are separated by a large distance. Suppose that the spin of atom A is now measured in the z-direction and that a given result is obtained. We can then predict that the spin of atom B is opposite. Of course, atom A will be disturbed when its spin is measured, so that we cannot conclude that its spin was defined beforehand as an independently existent element of reality. But our predictions of the spin of atom B can now be made without disturbing atom B in any way at all. Because measurements of atom A do not disturb atom B in any way, it follows from the EPR criticism that the z-component of the spin of atom B must have been an element of reality even before atom A was measured and that indeed it was always an element of reality.
	But now we could have measured any other component of the spin of atom A instead, and by considering such a measurement it follows that every component of the spin of atom B has always been an element of reality. From this EPR concluded that, the quantum theory is conceptually incomplete. For one of its basic principles is that when two observables do not commute, they cannot be defined together. Therefore at most only one of these could be an element of reality at a given time. But if two or more are elements of reality, then this means that the mathematical form of the theory cannot reflect this in any way at all. To take this into account we would need new concepts not contained in the present theory. So EPR would argue that while the results of the quantum theory are statistically correct, this theory does not give an adequate account of the actual reality of the individual system.
	Although it is postulated that there is no interaction between the particles through forces of known kinds, one could evidently assume that there was a new and as yet unknown kind of force that connected the two particles. Then when particle A was disturbed in its measurement, this disturbance would communicate itself to particle B in such a way as to bring about a result opposite to that of A for its spin.
	If such an interaction was operating, then the criterion of EPR for an element of reality would clearly be irrelevant, since by hypothesis a disturbance of atom A can now bring about a disturbance of atom B. However, EPR did not seem to regard this sort of interaction as worthy of serious consideration. To see why, we note that there are two possibilities:

	1. The force is transmitted at some finite speed less than or equal to that of light. In this case the statistical predictions of the current quantum theory would, of course, have to fail for measurements of A and B that are space-like separated. But EPR assumed, as we have pointed out, that these statistical predictions are correct, and thus they did not even envisage such a failure of the current quantum theory.
	2. The interaction is transmitted instantaneously. In this case the interaction would have to be nonlocal, i.e. to operate directly and immediately between the two particles with a strong force even at very large distances. Evidently this would violate the special theory of relativity.

7.8 On objections to the concept of nonlocality
	We have seen that some kind of nonlocality is common to all interpretations of the quantum theory which we have discussed thus far. Nevertheless there have been persistent and strong objections to the consideration of nonlocal theories of any kind, usually with the hope that a local interpretation will sooner or later be possible.
	In ancient times it does not seem that strong objections to nonlocality were very common. However, by the sixteenth century nonlocality did not seem to be an acceptable concept. For example, Newton referred to it as a’philosophical absurdity’ [18]. This sort of view continued to modern times. Thus, as we have already pointed out earlier, when Einstein noticed the possible nonlocal implications of the quantum theory, he referred to it as ‘spooky’ action at a distance [5]. The general mode of explanation that is currently acceptable in science is either action through contact or else action propagated continuously by fields. Indeed anything more than this is often regarded as incompatible with the very possibility of doing science.
	We cannot see any well-founded reason for such objections to the concept of nonlocality. Rather they seem to be more or less of the nature of a prejudice which developed together with the growth of modern science. First of all, the concept of nonlocality is perfectly rational in the way that we have used it in our interpretation of the quantum theory. For it has led neither to internal logical contradiction nor to disagreement with any facts. Moreover there is nothing in what we have done that disagrees fundamentally with the current scientific approach. Some people might object that if everything is strongly and nonlocally connected, there is no way to do science, because we will not be able to isolate any system sufficiently to study it. But we have shown that in the context of the large scale level in which physical investigations are carried out, nonlocal effects are not significant. Therefore our interpretation allows for exactly the same degree of separability of systems that is required for the kind of scientific work that is actually being done. 	We then made nonlocal inferences about the finer and more subtle aspects of material processes, but these are based on ordinary rational scientific inferences. Indeed it is just by using thewell-established methods of science that we have been led to make such inferences of nonlocality. Another objection to nonlocality is that it would violate special relativity. We shall discuss this question in more detail in chapter 12, where we shall
show that our interpretation is, in fact, compatible with special relativity. For the present we merely note that, as has been shown in section 7.2, quantum nonlocality will not allow a signal to be transmitted faster than light by means of the statistical measurements that are basic to the current quantum theory in its conventional interpretation. Since our interpretation leads to the same results as do the conventional ones, it follows that through quantum nonlocality there will be no way to exert instant control over what happens at far away places, nor to transmit signals to such places.
	We have not yet found what we could regard as a valid logical or scientific reason for dismissing nonlocality. We are therefore led to ask whether there could not be some other kind of reason. It may well be that one of the main reasons that people dislike the concept of nonlocality can be found in the history of science. For in the early period of the development of science there was a long struggle to get free from what may perhaps have been regarded as primitive superstitions and magical notions in which non-locality clearly played a key part. Perhaps there has remained a deep fear that the mere consideration of nonlocality might reopen the flood gates for what are felt to be irrational thoughts that lurk barely beneath the surface of modern culture. But as we have argued, there is no inherent reason why this should happen. However, even if there were such a danger, this would not by itself constitute a valid argument against nonlocality. Indeed if one were to accept such arguments one might equally well say, for example, that nuclear energy should not even be considered for further investigation because it might lead not only to nuclear war, but also to radioactive contamination and to destructive genetic mutations. While it is necessary to be aware of all these dangers, we still have to be able to enquire freely into all these avenues of research.
