

LIBER V vel REGULI

A   A   publication in Class D. 

Being the Ritual of the Mark of the Beast: an incantation proper to 
invoke the Energies of the Aeon of Horus, adepted for daily use of 
the Magician of whatever grade.

THE FIRST GESTURE 

The Oath of the Enchantment, which is called The Elevenfold Seal.

The Animadversion towards the Aeon.

	1. Let the Magician, robed and armed as he may deem to be fit,<R>
 	   turn his face towards Boleskine, that is the House of The Beast 
666.

 	2. Let him strike the battery 1-3-3-3-1.

	3. Let him put the Thumb of his right hand between its index and<R>
 	   mesius, and make the gestures hereafter following.

The Vertical Component of the Enchantment.

	1. Let him describe a circle about his head, crying NUIT!

	2. Let him draw the Thumb vertically downward and touch the<R>
 	   Muladhara Cakkra, crying, HADIT!

	3. Let him, retracing the line, touch the centre of his breast and 
<R>
	   cry RA-HOOR-KHUIT!

The Horizantal Components of the Enchantment.

	1. Let him touch the Center of his Forehead, his mouth, and his<R>
 	   larynx, crying AIWAZ!

	2. Let him draw his thumb from right to left across his face at the 
<R>
	   level of the nostrils.

	3. Let him touch the centre of his breast, and his solar plexus,<R>
 	   crying THERION!

	4. Let him draw his thumb from left to right across his breast, at<R>
 	   the level of the sternum.

	5. Let him touch the Svadistthana, and the Muladhara Cakkra,<R>
 	   crying BABALON!

	6. Let him draw his thumb from right to left across his abdomen, 
<R>
	   at the level of the hips.<R>
 	(Thus shall he formulate the Sigil of the Grand Hierophant, but<R>
 	 dependant from the circle.)

The Asseveration of the SPell.

	1. Let the Magician clasp his hands upon the Wand, his fingers and<R>
 	   thumbs interlaced, crying LAShTAL!  THELEMA! FIAOF! 	   AGAPE! 
AUMGN!

	(Thus shall be declared the Words of Power whereby the Energies<R>
 	 of the Aeon of Horus word his will in the world.)

The Proclamation of the Accomplishment.

	1. Let the Magician strike the battery: 3-5-3, crying ABRAHADABRA.



SECOND GESTURE

The Enchantment

1. Let the Magician, still facing Boleskine, advance to the circumference 
of   his circle.

2. Let him turn himself towards the left, and pace with the stealth 
and swiftness of a tiger the precincts of his circle, until he complete 
one revolution thereof.

3. Let him give the Sign of Horus (or The Enterer) as he passeth, 
so to project the force that radiatheth from Boleskine before him.

4. Let him pace his path until he comes to the North; there let him 
halt, and turn his face to the North.

5. Let him trace with his wand the Averse Pentagram proper to invoke 
Air (Aquarius).

6. Let him bring the Wand to the centre of the Pentagram and call 
upon NUIT.

7. Let him make the sign called Puella, standing with his feet together, 
head bowed, his left hand shielding the Muladhara Cakkra, and his 
right hand shielding his breast(attitude of Venus de Medici).

8. Let him turn again to the left, and pursue his Path as before, 
projecting the force from Bolskine as he passeth; let him halt when 
he next cometh to the South and face outward.

9. Let him trace the Averse Pentagram that invoketh Fire (Leo).

10. Let him point his wand to the centre of the Pentagram, and cry, 
HADIT!

11. Let him give the sign Puer, Standing with feet together, and head 
erect. Let his right hand (the thumb extended at right angles to the 
fingers) be raised, the forearm vertical at a right angle with the 
upper arm, which is horizontally extended in the line joining the 
sholders. Let his left hand, the thumb extended forwards and the fingers 
clenched, rest at the junction of the thighs (Attitude of the Gods 
Mentu, Khem, etc.).

12. Let him proceed as before; then in the East, let him make the 
Averse Pentagram that invoketh Earth (Taurus).

13. Let him point his wand to the centre of the pentagram, and cry, 
THERION!

14. Let him give the sign called Vir, the feet together. The hands, 
with clenched finger and thumbs thrust out forwards, are held to the 
temples; the head is then bowed and pushed out, as if to symbolize 
the butting of an horded beast (attitude of Pan, Bacchus, etc).

15. Proceeding as before, let him make in the West the Averse Pentagram 
whereby Water is invoked.

16. Pointing the wand to the centre of the Pentagram, let him call 
upon BABYLON!!

17. Let him give the sign Mulier. The feet are widely separated, and 
the arms raised so as to suggest a cresent. The head is thrown back 
(attitude of Baphomet, Isis in Welcome, the Microcosm of Vitruvius).

18. Let him break into the dance, tracing a centripetal spiral widdershins, 
enriched by revolutions upon his axis as he passeth each quarter, 
until he come to the centre of the circle. There let him halt, facing 
Boleskine.

19. Let him raise the wand, trace the Mark of the Beast, andd cry 
AIWAS!

20. Let him trace the invoking Hexagram of the Beast.

21. Let him lower the wand, striking the Earth therewith.

22. Let him give the sign of Mater Triumphans (THe feet are together; 
the left arm is curved as if it supported a child; the thumb and index 
finger of the right hand pinch the nipple of the left breast, as if 
offering it to that child). Let him utter the word THELEMA!

23. Perform the spiral dance moving deosil and whirling widdershins. 
Each time on passing the West extend the wand to the quarter in question, 
and bow;

	a. "Before me the powers of LA!" (to west).<R>
 	b. "Behind me the powers of AL!" (to east).<R>
 	c. "On my right hand the powers of LA!" (to North).<R>
 	d. "On my left hand the powers of AL!" (to South).<R>
 	e. "Above me the powers of ShT!" (leaping into the air).<R>
 	f. "Beneath me the powers of ShT!" (striking the ground).<R>
 	g. "Within me the powers!" (in the attitude of Phthah erect,<R>
 	    the feet together, the hands clasped upon the vertical wand.)<R>
 	h. "About me flames my Father's face, the Star of Force and Fire.<R>
" 	i. "And in the Column stands His six-rayed Splendour!"<R>
 	   (This dance may be omitted, and the whold utterance chanted in<R>
 	   the attitude of Phthah.)

The FINAL GESTURE

This is identical with the First Gesture.



